Processed text of the USHMM Encyclopedia volume 2, part A
Marked up for the Basic Attributes table
Kraków

Highlighting legend
The highlighting in the text is intended to avoid key information being overlooked, but must not replace thorough reading of the text. If you come across other key terms that might be highlighted to help data entry, please let Justus know (justus.hillebrand@maine.edu).
Labor, work
Judenrat, Jewish council, Jewish elder
Surrounding, nearby, neighboring, vicinity (mostly for ForcedMove_in)
Transport, deport, expel, transfer, resettle (mostly for ForcedMove_out)
Refuge, fled
Disease, epidemic, tuberculosis, typhus, dysentery, typhoid
Kill, shot, murder, hang, execut

Baranów Sandomierski
Pre-1939: Baranów Sandomierski, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Baranow, Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Baranów Sandomierski, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Baranów Sandomierski is located 24 kilometers (7.5 miles) south-southwest of Sandomierz. In 1921, there were 745 Jews living in the town (42 percent of the total population).
The Jews of Baranów, mostly poor and barely making a living were unprepared for the coming of war. Except for a few well-to-do families, they did not acquire any supplies. Hunger therefore followed immediately upon the German occupation in September 1939. Initially, the Wehrmacht administered the town, which did not particularly mistreat the Jews, but required them to perform forced labor. Jewish men worked on road repairs, women were cleaning and doing laundry, all returning after work to their quarters in Baranów. Later, the Polish (Blue) Police maintained order, with periodic visits by SS-men who abused the Jews as they pleased. A man by the name of Numerik, who was a shepherd before the war working for a Jew, conveniently remembered his distant German heritage, deciding that he was a member of the “master race,” and became the ruler of the town, with the Bürgermeister deferring to him. Numerik took money from the Jews, and also beat and abused them. (He is reported to have organized the deportation of Baranów’s Jews and personally to have shot Jews.)
After the outbreak of the German-Soviet war, Jews were sent to work camps in Biesiadka, Dęba, and Huta Komorowska. In Plaszów and Mielec the letters KL were tattooed on the hands of Jews. Polish policemen were the guards and frequently beat the Jews. There were about 180 Baranów Jews in all the work camps. They received passes to visit their families from Saturday afternoon until the roll call Monday morning, but they chose to return Sunday afternoon, to make sure they were not late. A German by the name of Nickel got drunk and announced that he must kill two Jews to prove himself to his friends. He shot and killed two brothers. 
The Baranów ghetto was established on June 30, 1942 to facilitate the extermination of the Jews of Baranów and its surroundings, which began on July 20, 1942 – three weeks later.  The ghetto encompassed part of the market place and sections of adjoining streets. Anticipating disaster, some Jews (including two Jewish policemen) managed to escape but perished later.  A day before the liquidation, 40 Jews from Tarnobrzeg were marched to the Baranów ghetto guarded by Polish policemen.  
On Sunday, the ghetto Jews were ordered to assemble on Monday morning in the market place, taking with them not more than 25 pounds of their belongings and leaving the keys to their homes in the door. Of the assembled Jews, the Germans took 20 or 30 elderly people and children by horse and cart to the cemetery, where Jews had been forced to dig a ditch, and they shot them there; Poles were brought in to cover the ditch. The rest of the assembled Jews were marched to the railroad station and put into cattle cars that already contained Jews from Rozwadów and Łańcut. For two days the train traveled the 50 kilometers (31 miles) to Dębica, where a selection took place, including Jews brought from Rozwadów, Tarnobrzeg, Kolbuszowa, and Dębica (about 10,000 people). SS men from Pustków carried out the selection. The elderly were immediately shot; some others were taken to work camps, and some to the ghetto in Dębica. On Thursday, the rest were transported to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
At the time of the deportation in July 1942, the Hauser family consisting of Natan, his wife Dora, and their two children, escaped and found shelter with a farmer in a neighboring village. After six months the farmer asked them to leave, as he was afraid. Therefore, the family returned to Baranów, where they hid in the hayloft of Stanisław Karol Wawrzycki, a Christian friend from before the war. When it became too dangerous for them to stay in Baranów, Wawrzycki took them to a forester and continued thereafter to supply them with food. Here the Hauser family survived until the arrival of the Red Army in July 1944. 
After the war, Poles were afraid returning Jews would claim their possessions and most were not welcoming; returning Jews soon left, as they feared for their lives. In the Jewish cemeteries only one tombstone remained intact.
The yizkor book, Sefer Yizkor Barnov, includes a listing of 162 names of the heads of Jewish families in Baranów who perished in the Holocaust. Having been derived entirely from the memories of survivors, the list cannot claim to be complete or accurate. The Jewish inhabitants of the following nearby villages perished along with the Jewish population of Baranów: Dąbrowica, Wola, Dymitrów, Skopanie, Padew, Przykop, Knapy, and Krasiczyn. 
Sources:
Much information on the fate of the Jews of Baranów during the Holocaust can be found in the yizkor book edited by N. Blumenthal, Sefer Yizkor Barnov (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1964). There is also a short article in Hebrew in Avraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 59-62. The ghetto is also mentioned in Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: Glowna Komisja, 1979), on page 91; and in Biuletyn Żydowskiego Instytutu Historycznego (1959), no. 30, on page 95.
Samuel Schalkowsky
Biecz
Pre-1939: Biecz, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
The town of Biecz is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. In 1921, the Jewish population of Biecz was 632.
On September 7, 1939, German forces entered Biecz. Some of the Jews tried to escape, but most were forced to return because of the rapid advance of the German army.  Soon the German military administration started to conscript Jews for forced labor and impose large financial contributions on the Jewish community. The Germans confiscated two study houses, converting them into a warehouse and a theater. In late 1939 and 1940, Biecz absorbed 500 refugees from Łódź and its surroundings, raising the Jewish population to 1,300.
In March 1940, the German civil administration introduced the wearing of white armbands bearing a blue Star of David for all Jews over the age of 12. It also established a Judenrat in Biecz, headed by Markus Peller. Its main task was to provide forced laborers for the Germans. In the summer of 1940, the Judenrat had to supply 30 Jews per day for German forces stationed in the area. Some Jews worked in the Ulrich-Becker sand and gravel plant, where meager wages were paid, and others on water regulation projects. Among the many discriminatory regulations imposed by the Germans, including onerous taxes and the confiscation of property, the Jews were also prohibited from leaving the town limits without a valid work permit. Furthermore, Jews were not allowed to participate in funerals unless they were closely related to the deceased. During the first two years of German occupation, acts of random violence and harassment were commonplace, including the shaving of beards from Jewish men, but very few Jews were killed in this period. 
By the end of November 1940, the local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) had organized a public kitchen that distributed more than 500 free meals during that month, serving also refugees from Łódź and Kraków. In May 1941, the JSS branch reported that there were 1,063 Jews in Biecz. Of the adult male Jews able to work, 260 were working and 85 were unemployed. Eighteen Jews were assigned to a labor camp outside the town.  These figures reflected the ability of the Biecz Jewish council to bribe the German authorities, limiting the number of those sent away to work.
In October 1941, the German authorities prohibited Jews from leaving the Jewish quarter in Biecz on pain of death.  The Jewish quarter (or open ghetto) was based around the Ringplatz (market square) and the surrounding alleys leading onto it. Living conditions for the Jews were extremely harsh. Although the Judenrat had to comply with the demands of the occupying authorities, they attempted to save the lives of some Jews by establishing workshops, including shops making straw shoe-covers for German soldiers, which employed some of the most impoverished Jewish residents. Three members of the Jewish council were the only Jews permitted to move freely outside the Jewish quarter. 
At the end of December 1941 the Germans ordered the Jews to surrender their fur items for the German army within three days. The collection was organized by the Judenrat, but some Jews burned their winter clothing rather than let them fall into the hands of the Germans.  
In 1942 conditions for the Jews in Biecz deteriorated severely. The number of shootings and killings increased markedly. Between January 3 and February 21, 1942, the Gestapo from Jasło and Gorlice visited Biecz several times; assisted by the local Polish auxiliary police, they shot more than 70 Jews. The corpses of the victims were buried in a common grave in the Jewish cemetery. 
By May 1942 the movement of Jews was further restricted within the town to the area around the Ringplatz. In June and July 1942, there was a large influx of Jews from surrounding small towns and villages that resulted in increased overcrowding and shortages of food. The population rose to almost 1,700 Jews in the “Biecz ghetto” in July. This concentration of the Jews was part of German preparations for their destruction.  At the end of July, the Germans summoned all male Jews aged 18-35 to the market square and selected about 170 for work in the Płaszów forced labor camp. Among this group were most of the few survivors from the Biecz ghetto. 
On August 14, 1942, German policemen assisted by Ukrainian auxiliaries surrounded the ghetto in the early hours of the morning. All of the Jews were ordered to assemble at 7:00 A.M. on the Ringplatz with a few belongings, as they would be “resettled.” During the roundup the police forces murdered about 150 elderly and sick Jews and their remains were buried in the Jewish cemetery. The roughly 1,000 Jews gathered on the market square were crammed into a barracks, where they were held for at least three days without food or water. On August 17, they were loaded onto railway wagons and sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
Many Jews attempted to hide within the ghetto or escape to the surrounding countryside. Some were shot by the Polish auxiliary police as they fled or when discovered in hiding. Others were handed over by local Poles, as the Germans imposed severe penalties for aiding Jews. One Pole was shot by the Germans, for robbing a Jew he had handed over to them. The Judenrat members were taken to the Jewish cemetery in Gorlice and shot there. The Germans sealed the empty Jewish houses and confiscated remaining property. Only the 40 Jews who worked in the Ulrich-Becker factory remained in Biecz. Subsequently they were sent to a labor camp in Przemyśl. Most of the Jews who fled to the villages were captured and killed with the assistance of the Polish (Blue) Police. 
Sources:
Further information on the history and fate of the Jewish population of Biecz can be found in the following publications: Yehudah Leyb Blum and Devorah Vinfeld-Samu’el, eds., Sefer-zikaron li-kidoshe ‘ayaratenu Baitsh/Unzer shtetl Baytsh: be/vinyanah uve-hurbanah (Ramat Gan: Irgun yotse Baitsh veha-sevivah be-Yisrael, 1959 or 1960); Samuel Halpern, The Life Story of Rabbi Samuel Halpern: A Holocaust Survivor (Canarsie, NY: S. Halpern, 1981); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, Vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 88-90.
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Biecz can be found in the following archives: AHJP (HM/7921); AŻIH (301/3199); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 15); VHF; and YVA (JM/1573, O-3/1695, O-16/1649, and O-33/42).
Caterina Crisci
Bircza
Pre-1939: Bircza (Yiddish: Berch), village, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Przemysl, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Bircza is located 24 kilometers (15 miles) southwest of Przemyśl. By 1921, there were 1,038 Jews residing there, constituting 54 percent of the village’s population. Before World War II, the town had three ethnic quarters. Poles occupied the eastern part of the market square, Ukrainians the western and southern parts, and the Jews lived in the northern part of the square.
In September 1939, Bircza was briefly under German occupation. On September 17, 1939, it was taken over by the Soviets and remained under their rule until the invasion of the Soviet Union by the German army on June 22, 1941. In the summer of 1940, a number of Bircza’s Jews, who declared that they desired to move to German-occupied Polish territory, were deported instead into the eastern part of the Soviet Union. 
According to survivor Avraham Kern, an unfenced ghetto was established in Bircza immediately upon the renewed German occupation, at the end of June 1941. The German authorities announced that the entire village was a ghetto. The Jewish population was informed that no one was allowed to leave Bircza on pain of death. The Germans, lacking a presence there, established a Judenrat and charged it with fulfilling German orders.
Famine, including deaths from starvation, followed the establishment of the ghetto. As a result, many Jews risked their lives seeking food in the surrounding villages. According to Kern, the Ukrainian police never killed any of the ghetto’s inhabitants; yet there were instances when local Poles or Ukrainians murdered Jews attempting to escape from the ghetto. The ghetto’s inhabitants were not conscripted for forced labor. There were, however, some Jews who were taken to a labor camp (e.g. survivor Izrael Rubinfeld).
Kern and his friends organized the clandestine teaching of Hebrew and Jewish history for the ghetto’s children. These classes lasted only a few months, as a Ukrainian policeman uncovered their existence and forced them to cease. Nobody was punished, due to connections one parent had with the Ukrainian police.  
The first mass execution of Bircza’s Jews took place in April 1942, when 50 of them were rounded up, shot on a hill outside of the village, and buried in a mass grave. One of the victims was Rubinfeld’s father. Several other mass executions – most likely including Jews from other localities – were carried out prior to the ghetto’s liquidation. The precise dating of these events remains unclear, but most secondary sources cite 16, reportedly wealthy, Jews shot on Kamienna Górka in May 1942, and between May and August of that same year approximately 200 Jews were shot at the Jewish cemetery. In Bircza Stara (Wierzysko) 500 (or according to another source 800) people were executed in either July or August 1942. The bodies of all of these victims were exhumed in 1957 and buried in the Jewish cemetery in Przemyśl. 
Sometime prior to the ghetto’s liquidation, Jews from other places in the vicinity were brought to the Bircza ghetto, including Jews from Pruchnik and from Leszczawa Dolna.
The ghetto was liquidated in mid-August 1942. Forty-eight hours before the deportation, on pain of death, Bircza’s Jews were ordered to collect a large contribution of money, wedding rings, and other jewelry. After the ransom was paid, the community was ordered to gather at the village square at 4:00 P.M. Men wearing uniforms shot those who did not report as instructed. All the ghetto residents were held in the square overnight, in the open, until dawn and were then marched 24 kilometers (15 miles) to the Przemyśl ghetto. The old and children were driven in carts, from which many elderly people were thrown and shot along the way.
In Przemyśl, 150 to 160 Jews were selected and sent for labor in Rzeszów. The remainder was deported soon afterwards to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
Sources:
The Bircza ghetto is briefly mentioned in Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich and Muzeum Regionalne PTTK w Brzozowie, 1993), pp. 26-27. 
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: VHF (# 816, 14890).
Jolanta Kraemer
Błażowa
Pre-1939: Błażowa, town, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo; 1939-1944: Blazowa, Kreis Reichshof, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Błażowa is located 25 kilometers (16 miles) south of Rzeszów. The 1921 census reported 930 Jews living in Błażowa (18.2 percent of the total population of 5,123); another 51 Jews resided within the Błażowa gmina. The Błażowa Jewish community numbered 825 people in 1939.
After the Soviets invaded Poland from the east on September 17, 1939, German troops stationed in Błażowa tried to expel as many Jews as possible by ordering them to cross the San River – located less than 16 kilometers (10 miles) from Błażowa – which had already been reached by Soviet forces. A total of 57 Jews left Błażowa permanently, and 768 decided to stay.  
German authorities set up a Jewish council (Judenrat), with Abraham Unger as the chairman and Wolf Silberstain as the secretary.  Mojsze Weiss was charged with assigning local Jews to labor conscription in accordance with German demands. Jakob Atlas was also a member of the Judenrat.
Members of Błażowa’s Jewish establishment were generally assigned to paid jobs that were fairly easy, such as working at a large estate occupied by the German authorities. Both Poles and Jews worked the estate’s land; as laborers, they were not mistreated. Weiss negotiated laborers’ paid minimum wages with the estate’s owner; most likely they received 1 or 1.20 złoty per day. Those Jews who were assigned to work for the municipality were unpaid. 
According to the survivor Jozef Atlas, the Germans did not interfere with local Jews and hardly ever came to Błażowa. It seems that there was only a Polish collaborationist (Blue) Police unit in the town, at least from the summer of 1941, when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union. As Jozef Atlas reported, the Polish Police were ill-disposed towards the Jews at times, and confiscated goods in their frequent house searches.
By July 1940, 89 deportees from Łódź and 50 from Kalisz had been transferred to Błażowa via Rzeszów. By mid-October 1940, 60 more had arrived from the same towns.  In December 1940, the Judenrat reported the following statistics regarding Jewish residents in Błażowa: out of a total of 991 Jews, 778 (240 families) were locals. Out of the total of 213 newcomers, 154 were deportees (39 families) and 59 refugees (23 families). The latter came to Błażowa as they had relatives there and had to rely on their support.
Thirty of the deportee families (90 people) subsisted solely on the welfare provided by the Self-Help Committee set up by the Judenrat, as less then 10 of the newly arrived families were able to find employment. A parentless child that was found later in Błażowa was assigned to a private family for sustenance at the Judenrat’s expense.
The Judenrat opened a soup kitchen on November 26, 1940, which placed a great financial burden on the community. It served an average of 120 meals daily, although there were demands for 200. Those able to pay were charged 0.20 złoty per meal. Aside from the Judenrat’s small monthly donation, this charge was the only other source of income for the kitchen. 
A local branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), subordinated to the Kreis office in Rzeszów, was established on May 2, 1941, and took over provision of welfare for Błażowa’s Jews. Józef Natansohn chaired the local committee, which also included Hersch Lieber and Simche Intrator. However, the efforts of the local JSS were largely futile, as the kitchen ceased its activity by August 1941 due to lack of funds.
When Natansohn resigned in September 1941, Doctor Jakób Neiss was charged with running the organization. Unhappy with the performance of the other two elderly members of the JSS (Lieber and Intrator), Neiss suggested that they be relieved from the committee by November 1941, because in his opinion they were either not willing or not capable of fulfilling their duties. At Neiss’s suggestion, David Lieber and Aleksander Klaristenfeld were nominated in their place. When the kitchen reopened in January 1942, it served only children, the elderly, and the sick. An estimated 80 children were undernourished in Błażowa, but the kitchen was able to feed only a total of 70 people per day.
JSS records imply that most Jewish businesses were taken over and placed under trustee management by mid-1941, although in many cases this process had been accomplished much earlier. In July 1941, only 13 Jewish craftsmen were running their own businesses: haberdashers, cobblers, and tailors. 
In mid-June 1941, approximately 100 Jews were taken to Rzeszów and employed in road works. They received full board and were paid enough to save some money for their families in Błażowa. This, the JSS believed, eased the burden on the town considerably. Another 80 Jews labored at this time outside of the gmina. By September 1941, the number of Błażowa workers decreased to 40 laboring within the gmina, and 35 beyond it. The same source reports approximately 250 Jews working in the gmina in the following months and none beyond its borders. There is no information on where or what kind of labor Błażowa Jews performed then, or if they were paid or compensated in any way. 
According to a survivor, Sam Reich, in the winter of 1941, the German authorities requested one young man from each Jewish family in Błażowa to go to a labor camp. The roundup was conducted in the middle of the night by two SS men, who arrived in a truck. Approximately 40 to 50 boys were driven to the nearby Huta Komorowska labor camp. The camp was unfenced, and although it was guarded by civilian ethnic Germans (Volksdeutschen) it was controlled by the SS. Its commander, a brutal man named Johann Robert Schmidt, was later replaced by Kopf, and then Nickel. There were no toilets in the camp. Water had to be delivered by wagons from another town. When it was available, it was dirty and there was never enough for the prisoners to wash themselves. Many died of disease and exhaustion there. Inmates were housed in a wooden barracks and slept on bunk beds with little straw. Each day they were escorted to a nearby forest to cut beech trees.
During the “fur Aktion” in December 1941, Błażowa Jews were given only two days to give up their fur garments and other winter clothing.
By mid-January 1942, the community was made aware that from February 1, 1942, Jews would no longer be allowed to leave Błażowa’s town limits. The basis for this was an order issued by the Reichshof Kreishauptmann, Heinz Ehaus, on December 17, 1941, creating Jewish quarters on the territory of the Kreis. It was effective from January 10, 1942 in Reichshof and, in the remainder of the Kreis from February 1, 1942. A ghetto in Błażowa was most likely set up soon after this date. There is no information available as to how the establishment of the ghetto influenced the community’s life. 
A new demand for young Jewish laborers came in the spring of 1942. According to Jozef Atlas, the Jews captured in this roundup were sent to the Pustków labor camp. Those who had fake jobs through connections (e.g. Atlas, whom the Judenrat had registered as a courier) were able to stay in Błażowa.
That spring, the Gestapo suddenly appeared in Błażowa. Jews ran in panic trying to hide in the nearby hills and along the riverbed. A total of 10 or 11 (according to another testimony, up to 15) Jews were captured and executed that day. Among them were Błażowa’s rabbi, Meir Shapiro, and his son. 
In May or June 1942, the Jews living in the vicinity were resettled into the Błażowa ghetto. The Błażowa community was not surprised by the resettlement to the Rzeszów ghetto. German authorities permitted a special market to be open for a week or two for Jews to sell their belongings. Then local Poles were ordered to report with their wagons on the day of the deportation to transport the ghetto residents to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
The liquidation of the Błażowa ghetto took place on June 26, 1942. There is no information on how many Jews were evacuated to Rzeszów. A Polish woman, Stanisława Jakubczyk, is known to have been shot in the course of the Aktion, but there is no information regarding Jewish victims on that day. 
In July 1942, the Jews of Błażowa along with the other Jews concentrated in the Rzeszów ghetto were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
Sources:
The Jewish community of Błażowa and its fate during the Holocaust is briefly mentioned in the following publications: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 27-28; Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 91-92; and in a series of articles by Stanisław Poradowski, “Zagłada Żydów rzeszowskich,” published by BŻIH (nos. 1-2 (1984) and 3-4 (1985)).
Documents on the persecution of the Jews of Błażowa can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (210/265 (AJDC); 211/231-233 (JSS)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 15); and VHF (# 15572 and 19803).
Jolanta Kraemer
Bobowa 
Pre-1939: Bobowa, village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Bobowa is located about 90 kilometers (56 miles) southeast of Kraków. In 1939, there were approximately 700 Jews living in the village.
The Wehrmacht captured the village on September 7, 1939. Kazimierz Wieniawa-Długoszowski was the Polish mayor of Bobowa at this time. It is unknown if there were any German forces permanently stationed in the village. Most sources note only that Gestapo and Gendarmerie officials from Jasło and Gorlice paid occasional visits. 
A Jewish council (Judenrat) was organized at the beginning of 1940 with Samuel Messinger as the chairman and Moses Hochberger as the secretary. The Judenrat’s main task was to care for refugees, collect contributions imposed by the authorities, and conscript laborers to meet German demands. According to one survivor, Efraim Landau, the Judenrat did its best, to treat the Jews fairly in the interests of the whole community, but other sources indicate there was some criticism of its handling of German demands for forced labor.
Unlike many other communities, the Judenrat did not initially organize a rotation system for forced labor. Rather, on its authority, Jews were seized at random from Bobowa’s streets or houses. The workday lasted 10-12 hours (including Saturdays). It is not clear who supervised the laborers. Records show that 30 Jews were working outside of Bobowa throughout 1940 and 10 during the first months of 1941. 
Jewish-owned businesses remained open for the first six months of the war. By September 1941, the number of tradesmen permitted to keep their businesses open had diminished from 62 before the war to only 23. The number of craftsmen also declined by more than half, from 29 to 13. 
By May 1940, there were already 90 refugees in the village, including many from Gorlice and its vicinity. A soup kitchen opened in the first part of the year, but had to close when supplies collected among Jews and Christians dried up. The number of refugees rose to 140, after approximately 40 Jews expelled from Krynica and its environs arrived in November 1940. The soup kitchen reopened and fed 100 Jews two or three meals per day. About 125 children received cocoa milk and white rolls.
There were 1,237 Jews registered in Bobowa in July 1941. This included 160 Gorlice Jews expelled to Bobowa that same month. By August 1941, 60 Jews expelled from the town of Oświęcim were transferred to Bobowa, raising the total number of Jewish residents to 1,270. Like many other groups, they arrived empty handed, draining Bobowa further of its resources. The local Jews pleaded with the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) central office in Kraków for additional support. One of the refugees, Rubin Wassertheil, recalls Bobowa’s Jews blaming the less religious refugees for their persecution, believing that it was a punishment from God for their not being observant.  
According to some sources, the Germans established a ghetto in Bobowa as early as October 1941.  Apparently it remained an open ghetto at first, as recalled by one survivor – Moishe Hochhauser – who was among those transferred to the Bieżanów labor camp in the summer of 1942. Another survivor, Samuel Oliner, however, who did not enter the ghetto until June 1942, recalls the ghetto as being gated and surrounded with barbed wired, implying that it was probably enclosed by the summer of 1942. There is no information as to who guarded the ghetto. It measured roughly one or two square kilometers (0.39 to 0.77 square mile) in area and was located in Bobowa’s predominantly Jewish center, including at least one side of the market square. Local Jews stayed in their own houses, while some refugees, who lived among Christians, were forced to move within the ghetto limits.  Its inhabitants often sneaked out either to barter or to buy food from local farmers. Workshops manufacturing straw overshoes were organized in the synagogue, possibly before the ghetto was established. 
Between January and March 1942, a series of executions took place, including of Jews brought in from other towns. Victims were shot either publicly on the market square or at the Jewish cemetery. The following shootings of Jews have been documented: on January 5, 1942, when the Gorlice Gestapo shot 17 Jews; on February 5, 1942, (4 shot); on March 4, 1942 (30 shot); and on March 14, 1942 (18 shot). During the execution on March 4, 30 of Bobowa’s wealthier ghetto residents were shot. They were first taken to a barn on the outskirts of Bobowa, where they were ordered to hand over all of their remaining valuables. Those who agreed were escorted home to collect the ransom and then shot upon providing it; the Germans shot the remainder at the cemetery.  
In the winter of 1941-1942, the Germans began transferring Jews living in the surrounding villages (including Brzana) into the Bobowa ghetto. The Jewish residents of Brzana were given only half an hour to pack their clothing and pots on sleighs. German Gendarmes then escorted them to the ghetto.  By April 1942, there were 1,345 Jews concentrated in the ghetto, including 678 refugees, indicating that the population had doubled since the start of the war. At some point Jews from Gładyszów were also brought in.  
On June 12, 1942, Jews living in the villages of Mszanka and Bielanka were forced into the ghetto. They could take with them only basic necessities and bedding. In July 1942, the Jews from Stróża were brought in. At the time, the ghetto was extremely overcrowded and the Judenrat was forced to place several families into one room. Samuel Oliner, who moved into the ghetto at this time, remembers its inhabitants as frightened and hungry; some were forced to eat non-kosher food. According to Pinkas ha-kehilot, due to the efforts of the Polish mayor, there was no spread of contagious diseases among the Jews in Bobowa. 
Between May and August 1942, a number of Jews were taken to labor camps in Bieżanów, Prokocim, and possibly Bochnia. A group of 210 Jews was sent to Bieżanów in August, where they worked on the railway for the Stuag and Klug companies. 
In June 1942, a workshop employing 150 Jewish tailors, shoemakers, upholsterers, haberdashers, and patch-makers was set up in Bobowa. Their production included straw shoes, drapery, and children’s toys.  
On August 13, 1942, the Germans called for new volunteers for the Bieżanów camp. The community was promised that if each family were to send one able body, the remainder would be left in peace. The number of volunteers is unknown, but upon their departure the same afternoon, Germans and Ukrainian auxiliary forces surrounded the ghetto.  
The ghetto was liquidated on the morning of August 14, 1942. The liquidation commando went from house to house, banging on doors and dragging the inhabitants from their dwellings to the market square, where trucks awaited them. The Germans offered the Judenrat chairman, Messinger, a chance to save himself, but he refused. 
Twenty-five of Bobowa’s Jews were reportedly shot in the course of the liquidation Aktion, either on the streets of Bobowa or in the Jewish cemetery, where they were later buried in a mass grave.  The same day, several hundred (possibly 700) of Bobowa’s and Gorlice’s Jews were shot in the Garbacz Forest near Stróżówka village, in the vicinity of Gorlice. Another 80 are recorded as having been shot in the Dąbry Forest, near Rzepiennik Strzyżewski, “after August 14, 1942.”
The number of Jews inhabiting the ghetto prior to its liquidation is difficult to determine, because the number of Jews reportedly sent to various labor camps differs considerably among the available sources. Another complication arises from the German policy of selecting Jews from different locations and taking them together to yet another location to execute them, as in the August 14th 1942 shooting of Bobowa and Gorlice Jews mentioned above. In addition, there are several accounts, which indicate that those who survived the initial selection were also subsequently murdered.
It appears most likely that in fact most, if not all, of Bobowa’s ghetto residents were shot in the Garbacz forest [near Stróżówka], where the Jews were made to undress before they were shot next to a mass grave.  Some sources indicate, however, that only about 400 Jews, probably women, children, and elderly were murdered in the Dombro [Dąbry] Forest near Bobowa. Of the remainder, some were sent to the Szebnie labor camp and the others were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp after their transfer to and subsequent deportation from the Gorlice (and possibly a part to the Biecz) ghetto. 
Sources:
The following published sources make reference to the Bobowa ghetto: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 63-64; Samuel P. Oliner and Pearl M. Oliner, The Altruistic Personality: Rescuers of Jews in Nazi Europe (New York: Free Press, 1988), p. xvi; and Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 109.
The following archival sources were used in preparing this entry: AŻIH (210/258, 211/235, 301/1373, and 301/242); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 15; RG-02.208M (Pamiętniki); and Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)); and VHF, (# 10797, # 15948# 18652; # 20731, # 34133-3, # 49767-1). 
Jolanta Kraemer
Bochnia
Pre-1939: Bochnia, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Salzberg, Kreis Krakau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Bochnia, powiat center, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Bochnia is located 45 kilometers (28 miles) east of Kraków. In 1939, there were around 3,500 Jews living there, comprising about 20 percent of the town’s population.
German forces occupied Bochnia on September 3, 1939. Soon after their arrival the Germans began to kidnap Jews for forced labor. Deportations to labor camps began in 1940 and continued through most of the ghetto’s existence. Sometimes the Jewish community had to pay the transportation costs to the camps.  
In the fall of 1939, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in Bochnia to act as intermediary between the Jewish community and the German authorities. In 1940, Symcha Weiss was appointed as chairman of the Judenrat and a Jewish Police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was created under Dr. Szymon Rosen.
The Jewish population grew through the arrival of successive waves of Jewish refugees, from Kraków (May 1940), Krzeszowice (March 1941), and Mielec (spring 1942).
The German authorities established a ghetto in the center of Bochnia in March or April 1941. Initially the ghetto remained unfenced. The area of the ghetto was about 600 meters by 200 meters (219 by 656 yards), based around Kowalska Street.  From July 1941, Jews were not permitted to leave the ghetto without a special permit; by October the punishment for disobeying this order was death. Over the following 10 months, over 300 Jews were shot in the Jewish cemetery for disobeying this command.
Following the arrival of the Krzeszowice Jews, the ghetto was expanded in April 1941, and included the following streets: Proszowska, Wygoda, Podedworze Dolne, and the remainder of Krzeczowska Street. Due to the large number of refugees and the very confined space, the ghetto became severely overcrowded and sanitary conditions were deplorable. 
The Germans controlled the supply of food into the ghetto and enforced strict food rationing. Those who worked received rations that were sufficient barely for one person. In order to feed the sick and the old, their names were added to the list of productive workers, but their relatives then had to cover for them by working even longer hours to meet stiff production quotas.
By the end of 1941, about 2,000 Jews were employed in workshops in the ghetto. They manufactured army uniforms, handkerchiefs, underwear, shoes, brushes, toys, electrical equipment, and baskets for the Germans. A German named Wettermann was in charge of these workshops, but a Jew, Salomon Greiwer, oversaw day-to-day operations.  Other Jews exited the ghetto under escort each day to perform forced labor.
To maintain a semblance of normalcy, an elementary school and a Bet Midrash operated within the ghetto until August 1942. There was also a hospital from the end of 1941, which the Germans established to deal with a typhus epidemic. Dr. Anatol Gutfreund was in charge. The hospital received some medical supplies, with aid initially received from the American Joint Jewish Distribution Committee (AJDC) in Kraków. 
Nazi restrictions did not extend to Jews who were citizens of certain foreign countries. Therefore, these Jews were able to provide some contact between the ghetto’s residents and the outside world. They also helped to smuggle foodstuffs into the ghetto, gave refuge to children during Aktions, and helped to organize escape routes to Hungary and Slovakia. 
In the spring of 1942, the ghetto was enclosed by a wooden fence, about two meters (six-and-a-half or seven feet) high, which Polish Police guarded.  
Mass expulsions throughout the region spread fear among the Jews in the spring and summer of 1942. There were reports about whole communities being murdered. Greiwer tried to reassure the workers that they would remain protected, but many ghetto residents constructed bunkers in order to hide when the time came.
A few days before the first mass deportation in August 1942, the Judenrat was forced to pay the Germans a sum of 250,000 złoty – the latest in a series of demands – supposedly as protection money to guarantee the Jews’ safety. However, it proved to be just a scam to steal the Jews’ last remaining money.
All the Jews in Kreis Bochnia were gathered together on the evening of Friday August 21, 1942, and were brought to Bochnia the next morning. The entire Jewish community of Nowy Wiśnicz (about 1,500 people) was transferred to the Bochnia ghetto, along with Jews from a number of villages, including Brzeżnica, Bogucice, Lipnica Murowana, Rzezawa, Targowisko, Trzciana, Uście Solne, and Zabierzów. This relocation caused fear and panic in the Bochnia ghetto, as they now expected a large-scale Aktion – which indeed followed, between August 25 and 27.  Some Jews went into hiding, on their own or with their German employers. 
Gestapo, SS, and Ukrainian auxiliaries surrounded the ghetto. Then (with help from the Jewish Police) they rounded up the Jews and conducted selections. As so many people were in hiding, there was a shortage of deportees. As a result, even some people with special permits were included in the deportation, and Jewish policemen had to bring their own family members. Those who were unwilling or unable to follow orders were shot in front of their families. Greiwer was murdered when he tried to save his workers. 
The Gestapo shot a number of Jews in and around the ghetto and a group of about 800 elderly and sick Jews (including some from the hospital) was loaded onto trucks with the assistance of Polish Labor Battalion (Baudienst) members and transported to the village of Baczków to be shot. They were thrown into a pit and buried while many were still alive.  
The remaining Jews on the roll-call square (Appellplatz), comprising healthy and strong Jews, were loaded onto a waiting train and sent to the Bełżec killing center, where they were murdered in the gas chambers.  Almost the entire membership of the Judenrat was on the last transport to Bełżec. They went along to reassure people that the Nazis were really resettling them to the east. In total, more than 5,000 Jews were deported to Bełżec during the August Aktion. 
After the Aktion, the remaining ghetto residents again had to pay for their right to survive, which they ironically called “slaughter money.”  Officially there were still some 1,000 Jews left in the ghetto, plus an additional 400 “illegals” in hiding. The number soon swelled to around 5,000 again, however, as many Jews emerged from hiding in Bochnia and the surrounding countryside. The head of the Gestapo in Bochnia, SS-Untersturmführer Wilhelm Schomberg, issued the Jews special permits allowing them to remain, and the workshops resumed operations, now employing some 3,000 people. During a second Aktion on November 10, 1942, 150 people were shot and around 500 were sent to Bełżec. 
That same day, the Germans announced that Bochnia would be one of the five remaining towns in Distrikt Krakau where Jews could live in a “Jewish residential area” (Judenwohnbezirk).  As a result, the ghetto population again swelled to more than 5,000, as additional people emerged from hiding. 
In December 1942, several German officers bought the workshops to run them as a private business. At this time the Bochnia ghetto was split into two parts: Ghettos A and B, divided by an internal fence guarded by the Jewish Police. In Ghetto A, those who held workers’ permits were housed in separate barracks for men and women, as it was now officially designated a forced labor camp, subordinated to the SS- and Polizeiführer (SSPF) in Kraków; Ghetto B contained those who did not work: the elderly, disabled, weak, and children. The new owners were obliged to pay the SS for the right to exploit Jewish slave laborers. The Bochnia Jewish community had officially ceased to exist, and children had to be hidden, as they were forbidden in the labor camp. 
The Hebrew youth movement Akiba was active in Bochnia before the war, and from 1940 its members established an underground cell in the town, which cooperated with the branch of the Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa (Jewish Fighting Organization, ŻOB) in Kraków. The Bochnia underground dealt in money and false IDs, and prepared bunkers in the forest as a base for resistance operations. ŻOB members were recruited in the ghetto and after December 1942 the underground was located in Ghetto B. From there they maintained communications with sections of the Polish underground and also the ŻOB members in Kraków. On Friday, February 26, 1943, the Germans arrested most members of the Bochnia underground. Surviving ŻOB leaders moved to the forest to continue the armed struggle against the Nazis. They remained in contact with the remaining cell inside the ghetto until the ghetto’s liquidation.
In the early spring of 1943, another Aktion took place in which 100 Jews were sent to Płaszów for forced labor. In July 1943, there was a scramble in the ghetto to purchase false documents showing foreign citizenship, as it was rumored that any foreign Jew who paid a large sum would be able to migrate to the United States. However, the ruse was soon exposed when approximately 100 Jews were not sent to the United States, but to Płaszów, where the Germans shot all but two of them. 
The final liquidation Aktion started on September 1, 1943. At approximately 5:00 A.M., SS forces surrounded the ghetto and roused the residents from sleep, with orders to go to the Appellplatz. There they were divided into two groups. One contained most of the inhabitants of Ghetto B, including all of the children and elderly. This group, numbering approximately 4,000 people, was sent to the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp to be murdered. The other group, comprising approximately 1,000 people aged 13 to 35, was transported to the Szebnie camp on September 3, where most of them died. At the communal cemetery around 60 people were shot and their bodies burned. 
Officially, 150 Jews were allowed to remain in Bochnia as a work detail to clear the ghetto, along with a few members of the Jewish Police. Another 100 people joined the work detail after appealing to the Judenrat. However, when this was discovered the next day, 100 people were taken at random and shot in the street. Those remaining were forced to pile up the dead and burn the bodies. These 150 people worked until December 1943, and then 50 were sent to the Płaszów camp and 100 went to Szebnie. 
Many Jews hid during the last Aktion, but most were uncovered over the following six weeks.  The Jews in the work details tried to help them, but the Germans used dogs and smoke to force the Jews out of hiding in order to murder them. Most who tried to escape were murdered, either by the Germans or extremist Polish nationalists. A few made it to Hungary. The total death toll for the Bochnia ghetto was at least 13,000 Jews deported, most of them sent straight to their deaths in Bełżec or Auschwitz, and over 1,800 people killed in Bochnia and its vicinity. 
Sources:
Publications on the Bochnia ghetto include the following: I. Zelinkovsky, Ghetto Bochnia: On the Trail of the Family I Never Knew (Canada: I. Zelinkovsky, 1995), another version is available on the web (www.angelfire.com); “Bochnia Ghetto,” on the Aktion Reinhard Camps (ARC) website (www.deathcamps.org/occupation/bochnia%20ghetto.html); Irena Zawidzka, “W 50 rocznice zaglady getta bochenskiego,” in Rocznik Bochenski, vol. I (Bochnia, 1993); Maria Szymkowska, “Bochenskie getto,” in Wiadomosci bochenskie, no. 3 (2002); Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 2003), vol. 27, Lfd. Nr. 667; Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 64-69; and Chaim Shlomo Friedman, Dare to Survive (New York: CIS, 1992).
Documents describing the fate of the Jews of Bochnia during the Holocaust can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1909, 4927; 211/236-241); BA-L (B 162/1967-1976, 2251-2259, and 14275-14276 (Verdict of LG Kiel 2 Ks 4/66, March 19, 1968)); USHMM (RG-15.019M; RG-50.120*0099 and 0251; and RG-50.166*0021); VHF; and YVA (e.g., collections M-1/E and O-3).
Shannon Phillips and Martin Dean
Brzesko
Pre-1939: Brzesko, town, Tarnów powiat, Kraków województwo; 1939-1945: Kreis Tarnow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland 
Brzesko is located about 52 kilometers (32.5 miles) east of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II in 1939, there were 2,119 Jews living in Brzesko (around 50 percent of the total population). 
German armed forces occupied the town on September 5, 1939. The Jews were rounded-up for forced labor. In September 1939, the Germans set the synagogue on fire. They also demanded a ransom of 40,000 złoty from the Jewish community and took 10 Jews hostage. In October 1939, the Germans registered all men between the ages of 15 and 60. The Jews were ordered to wear armbands bearing the Star of David. A Jewish council (Judenrat) was established, headed by Jakub Hendler. It was entrusted with meeting German demands for forced laborers. The Szczurowa and Borzęcin Jewish communities (comprising 239 Jews in total in 1940) were both subordinated to the Brzesko Judenrat. Apart from the Judenrat and the Brzesko branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), there was also a Committee for the Aid to Refugees and the Poor, as well as the children’s center (CENTOS), which provided assistance to around 130 children in 1940. German police officials (most notoriously Wilhelm Rommelmann, Lapsch, and Beck) visited Brzesko occasionally to shoot Jews. They selected their victims either from a previously prepared list, or at random. 
The Brzesko JSS reports 3,270 Jews in Brzesko on May 31, 1941. There were 1,625 Jews seeking assistance, but only 1,125 received help. Furthermore, around 500 Jews received meals from the community kitchen; 1,100 received financial assistance; 1,033 Jews received coal; 328 were given medical assistance; and 640 received medicine. There were still 48 Jewish workshops in Brzesko, where mainly tailors, hat makers, furriers, and butchers worked. Around 82 businesses were owned by Jews and some 200 Jews performed physical labor. In the first week of March 1941 and again on March 9, 1941, transports of Jews from Kraków arrived in Brzesko. These resettled Jews were left without any means of support. In December 1941, the Germans demanded that the Jews surrender all their winter equipment and fur clothing for the German army in Russia. 
In the fall of 1941, the Germans created an open ghetto in Brzesko, the area of which was designated by signs. Two Jewish residential districts were created in separate areas of the town: one area was located on both sides of Wapienna Street; the second area was situated around present-day Sobieskiego, Ruchu Oporu, Ogrodu Jordanowsiego, and Chopina streets, and also Kazimierza Wielkiego Square. The Jews could not leave these areas on pain of death. At first, there were around 3,000 Jews concentrated in the ghetto, but the number rose to 6,000 in the summer of 1942. A Jewish police force also was created, headed by Diestler, a former soldier in the Austrian army. Jews performed forced labor for the Germans (a number of Jews from Brzesko were sent to the Pustków and other labor camps), as well as working in workshops inside the ghetto. 
In the ghetto, the Jews experienced hunger and disease. They could still obtain food while the ghetto remained open, as some contact with the local population was maintained. Due to poor sanitary conditions and malnutrition, an epidemic of typhus broke out. Patients were treated in the ghetto hospital where Maurycy Gross was one of the doctors. During three days around 15 people were hospitalized, 5 of whom died. Jews also became victims of shootings by the Germans. After the executions, the Germans demanded payment for the ammunition used, and forced the Jews to sign documents falsely indicating the natural death of the victim. The Germans also demanded further “contributions” from the Jewish community. 
By the spring of 1942, the typhus epidemic had ended. An Aktion took place around that time. The Germans came to the town, rounded up people, and shot 6 of them in the town square. In mid-April 1942, a further Aktion took place. The Germans, including three members of the local Order Police, Lapsch, Wagner, and Mikler, shot around 50 Jews; the bodies were buried in two mass graves at the Jewish cemetery. In May 1942, Germans arrived from Tarnów demanding furniture and money from the Jews of Brzesko. On June 18, 1942, the third Aktion took place. Ukrainian units surrounded the town, while German forces carried out the Aktion. Around 200 Jews were shot at the Jewish cemetery in Brzesko and 400 were deported.  
According to an order issued by Kreishauptmann Dr. Kipke in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the settlements of Kreis Tarnów, except from the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move to Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, or Żabno by July 23, 1942. In mid-July 1942, the Germans established an enclosed ghetto in Brzesko. It was surrounded by a fence; windows had to remain closed, and the curtains drawn. There were two ghettos one on each side of the church and divided by an “Aryan” street. Jews were transferred from one ghetto to the other escorted by the Jewish Police. In the ghetto there was overcrowding. According to German policy, 10 people were assigned for each window in a dwelling. People prepared hiding places; some forged Aryan papers. There was not enough to eat. The social organizations distributed only small amounts of food, and the ghetto inhabitants had to obtain the rest themselves. The Jewish Police were able to smuggle food into the ghetto; people also used to sneak out at night and barter items for food with the Poles. Polish Police guarded the ghetto externally, but some Jews were able to escape. If they were caught outside the ghetto, they were shot. Although no official religious services were held, some people maintained their religious practices, such as observing Shabbat.  
In September 1942, the Germans liquidated the ghetto. The Jews were rounded up and sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. A number of Jews managed to escape the roundup, but most were subsequently captured and shot. Some escapees received help from Dr. Jan Brzeski who treated Jews in their hideouts at great personal risk. Only around 70 Jews remained after the Aktion, tasked with clearing out the ghetto area. Afterwards, these Jews were sent to the Tarnów ghetto. In 1943, the Germans shot 28 Jews at the Brzesko Jewish cemetery (presumably people uncovered in hiding). 
Only about 200 Jews from Brzesko survived the Holocaust. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the history and murder of the Jews in Brzesko include the following: “Brzesko,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984); Aleksandra Pietrzykowa, Region tarnowski w okresie okupacji hitlerowskiej. Polityka okupanta i ruch oporu (Warsaw: PWN, 1984); Iwona Zawidzka, Cmentarz żydowski w Brzesku (Brzesko: Brzeska Oficyna Wydawnicza, 2001); and Adam Bartosz, Tarnowskie judaica (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo PTTK “Kraj,” 1992).
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Brzesko can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/609, 611, 1376; JM 10005, # 5735958); IPN (ASG, sygn. 48a, p. 25; ZhIII/31/35/68; Dsn 7/30/68/”W” 471); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124, reel 16 and RG-15.019M, reels 3 and 14); VHF (# 4147, # 8609, # 30095, # 37249, # 41736, # 42765, # 51734); WAPKOB; and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Brzostek
Pre-1939: Brzostek, village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
According to the 1921 census there were 479 Jews living in Brzostek. The community occupied the village square, 20 Czerwca and Żydowska Streets; the synagogue was located on the latter. By 1939 Brzostek had an estimated 500 Jewish residents.
A significant number of Brzostek’s Jews fled to the east on the outbreak of war, into the part of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union in the fall of 1939. With the occupation, the Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat), chaired by Israel Schonwetter. Its primary task was to supply laborers for agricultural work, to level and beautify the village square, and to pave roads. Labor squads building fortifications in Wiśniowa were driven to work on trucks and brought back in the evening. 
By February 1940, a committee for refugee relief had been established in Brzostek. A man named Goldman was its chairman. Refugees were quartered in the synagogue; their numbers and place of origin is unknown. In 1942, a number of Jews from the Jodłowa ghetto were transferred to Brzostek. 
In the summer of 1941, after the invasion of the Soviet Union, the Germans selected around 40 professionals from among Brzostek’s Jews to be sent to a labor camp in Lwów. One of the men selected, Adam Szus, recalls that the Germans threatened to kill his parents after he went into hiding to avoid deportation. 
By the summer of 1941, a branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) had been established in Brzostek. It operated briefly, only to be closed in September 1941 by the Kraków JSS headquarters, in response to an assessment by the Jasło branch describing the Brzostek JSS’s “insignificant activity.” 
Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Jasło County, established that the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941 (most likely in the autumn), when a ghetto in Jasło was established. One of the ghettos created around that time was in Brzostek. An open ghetto, unguarded and unfenced, it most likely included the village square and Żydowska Street.
At the beginning of 1942, a number of Jews were seized for work in labor camps, including in Pustków.  On May 1, 1942, the Germans shot eight Jewish communists who were then buried in the Jewish cemetery on Szkotnia Street. 
Two days before the ghetto’s liquidation on August 12, 1942, the Gestapo requested chairman Schonwetter to report to the Polish police station for questioning, where he was then held until the Aktion. The wife of the Polish police commander informed Schonwetter’s family of the planned execution. The police commander released Schonwetter, asking him to “go for a walk.” Schonwetter returned to the jail saying: “I know exactly what is happening. But I am the leader of this community. I will stand with my people.” 
According to Wieliczko, Jews from the Brzostek ghetto were brought to nearby Kołaczyce on August 12, 1942. Following a selection, some were sent to a labor camp in Jasło. Several people were shot during the liquidation Aktion in Kołaczyce. Others (as many as 260 people) were transported by the Germans to the Podzamcze Forest (also referred to as the forest in Kowalowy) near Krajowice village and then shot that same afternoon. Members of the Jasło Gestapo supervised the execution. 
Sources:
The following publications refer to the fate of the Jews of Brzostek: Bogdan Stanaszek, Brzostek i okolice (Brzostek: Towarzystwo Miłośników Ziemi Brzosteckiej, 1997), pp. 61, 63, 66; Mieczysław Wieliczko, Jasielskie w latach drugiej wojny światowej (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, 1974), pp. 131, 148, 182-184; and Arnon Rubin, The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Communities in Poland and their Relics Today: vol. 3, District Krakow (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University Press, 2008), pp. 147-148. 
Archival sources include: AŻIH (210/280 (AJDC), 211/472-473 (JSS), 301/4697 (Relacje)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), 210/280; Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS)); VHF (# 4409, # 20720, # 35501).
Jolanta Kraemer
Brzozów
Pre-1939: Brzozów, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Sanok, then from November 1941, Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Brzozów, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
The town of Brzozów is located 18 kilometers (11 miles) north of Sanok. There were 1,127 Jews living in Brzozów in 1921, constituting 21.7 percent of the total population. Their number had fallen to 1,046 by 1931.
The Germans occupied Brzozów on September 9, 1939. Upon entering the town, they confiscated merchandise from Jewish shops, marked them with an inscription in yellow paint (“Jew”), and later assigned trustees to these businesses. Jewish residents, including their rabbi, Mojżesz Weber, were forced to clean streets and labor at nearby petroleum wells. Women cleaned the offices of the German administration. By October 1939, the number of Jews had declined to 920, as many fled east to the Soviet-occupied Polish territories.
On October 26, 1939, the Germans appointed a Jewish council (Judenrat) chaired by Benzion Laufer. Joel Fass replaced him, most likely at the beginning of 1940. Mojżesz Knobelbarth was Fass’s “sword-arm”; Sala Biber (secretary) and Uszer Freund (treasurer) also staffed the Judenrat. The Gestapo, together with officials from the Kreis and Landrat offices, paid the Judenrat frequent visits, demanding contributions in foreign currencies, gold, tea, coffee, liqueurs, and furs. 
A German Gendarmerie post and its jail were located initially at 1 Sienkiewicza Street; later it was moved to the grounds of a Church parish. The prison of a local court was located on Mickiewicza Street.
By March 1940, 91 Jewish refugees had settled in Brzozów. The Judenrat opened a kosher soup kitchen for their benefit on March 7, 1940. It operated six days a week, but half of its meals were meatless. The kitchen served on average 140 meals a day, but only 33 to the newly arrived refugees. The Brzozów community contributed in 25 percent of the kitchen expenses, while the remainder was covered by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC). Due to financial constraints, meals with meat were soon reduced to one per week. As a result, the recipients became “very discontented” and the Judenrat considered closing the kitchen. Unable to finance it any longer, the Judenrat had no other choice and closed it anyway on July 20, 1940. 
In August 1940, the Judenrat reported 910 Jews (including 113 refugees) living in Brzozów. By November 7, 1940, the number of Jews had risen to 944, and the Judenrat was reporting that, “We are sending over 300 workers to labor camps in Krosno, Baligród, Wzdów, and Bzianka.” 
In May 1941, a local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in Brzozów to relieve the Judenrat of its assistance duties to the poor and refugees. Out of a total of 1,007 Jews in Brzozów, one quarter sought assistance and 811 were registered as “without an occupation.” There were, however, 44 stores and 21 Jewish workshops still operating in the town. At the same time, only 13 Brzozów Jews were laboring in camps outside of the gmina. 
The Brzozów ghetto was most likely set up in the second half of 1941, or possibly at the beginning of 1942. The ghetto encompassed the eastern part of the market square, including Piastowa and Kazimierzowska streets. The displacement was without warning. Brzozów’s Jews were allowed to take up to 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of clothes and household goods with them. 
Jacek Joterski, a Pole who assisted the Jewish community during the war and on whose memoir this entry is largely based, states that the ghetto inmates were forbidden to travel more than one kilometer (0.6 mile) beyond the town limits on pain of death. The ghetto was severely overcrowded with up to 10 people sharing a room, typically with only straw for a bed and people sleeping in shifts due to the lack of space.  
None of the sources refer to the ghetto being physically enclosed. A Jewish police force was organized in October 1941 to keep order inside the ghetto and to guard it internally. Approximately 200 men were conscripted into the Ortschutz (local protection force) and also air-raid-defense units, which guarded and patrolled the ghetto at night and enforced the blackout. The latter included Poles and was supervised by the Gendarmerie and Polish Police. Fifteen prominent Poles and all ghetto residents were declared to be hostages to prevent any acts of sabotage.
In October 1941, the JSS reported that it was responsible for a total of 1,350 Jews in seven neighboring settlements; of that number 1,000 were Brzozów Jews. It was at this time that the soup kitchen was reopened. Over a dozen workers labored on road works in Kalnica near Baligród. 
In May 1942, the authorities announced an increase in the size of the Jewish Police. 
On June 18, 1942, 400 Jews from the surrounding settlements were transferred to Brzozów. The Housing Committee and the Jewish Police placed them en masse in community buildings. It was also reported that a group of Jews was transferred from the Krosno ghetto. At that time, the Jewish Police was in the process of recruiting new members, as most of its staffers had been sent to Jaśliska to supervise Jewish laborers.  Among the newcomers were approximately 20 families from Huminiska, who even before their transfer to the ghetto had been working in Brzozów on a daily basis, carrying stones for road construction. Ten of these families were housed in a local school. 
At the beginning of August 1942, 258 Jews were deported to the Płaszów labor camp via the Targowiska train station. Over 40 people were sent for spadework at the petroleum well in Grabownica.
The Germans informed the Judenrat one day in advance that the ghetto residents would be resettled to labor camps on August 10, 1942. It was also announced that 50 craftsmen and their families would stay in Brzozów. All the Jews were ordered to gather at the local stadium near the Stobnica River with up to 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage. The community was anxious and suspicious of German intentions, as they were aware that large ditches had recently been dug in a nearby forest on August 8.
The ghetto residents were transferred to the stadium unescorted. There, a selection by a single SS-man was conducted; he directed individual Jews to be escorted away by other SS-men onto three trucks standing at the stadium’s gate. The Judenrat secretary, Sala Biber, checked those selected against a list. The trucks departed in a southwesterly direction towards the Spring Forest (Las Zdrojowy). Some of the trucks reportedly went northwest, in the direction of Stara Wieś village. By 10:30 A.M., the stadium was empty. The last to be loaded onto trucks were the members of the Judenrat.
The trucks were unloaded near the turning off point to Zmiennica, at the Spring Forest. Jews were ordered to undress and then led deeper into the forest to an opening, which locals often used for picnics. Three SS-men carried out the executions by shooting their victims in the back of the skull on the edge of the pits. Small children were killed using an iron crowbar. By 2:00 P.M., an estimated 700 to 800 Jews had been murdered. As the SS had ordered the Judenrat to prepare a detailed list of all those selected to be killed, a search for the approximately 100 who had gone into hiding ensued.  
According to another source, the Krosno Gestapo conducted the liquidation Aktion. In its course, 1,400 Jews were murdered, of which 800 were shot in the settlement of Karolówka.  Some sources, e.g., Obozy hitlerowskie and Pinkas ha-kehilot, state that a number of Jews survived the selection and were sent to Iwonicz (23 kilometers (14.5 miles),  southwest of Brzozów). 
Sources:
The following publications were used to prepare this entry: Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 120; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004); and E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O Zagładzie Żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, p. 88.
Archival sources referring to the Brzozów ghetto include: USHMM (RG.02.208M (Memoirs of Jews); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); RG-50.002*0030); and AŻIH (210/282 (AJDC); 302/258 (Memoirs of Jews)).
Jolanta Kraemer
Czudec
Pre-1939: Czudec, village, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Reichshof, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Czudec is located 136 kilometers (85 miles) east of Kraków. The 1921 census registered 322 Jews in Czudec, constituting 35.3 percent of the total population; this number had increased to 376 by 1939. 
According to survivor Samuel Halpern, when the war broke out on September 1, 1939, the commander of the local Polish police force approached Czudec’s rabbi and advised him that all Jewish men should leave the village. He believed that the women would be safe under German occupation. There is no information regarding the initial occupation of the village and possible casualties. 
The new German authorities set up a Jewish council (Judenrat), but its composition is unknown. A self-help committee was set up following the arrival of a stream of refugees and deportees in November 1939. One of its initial members was Jakub Nebenzahl who was likely a member of the Judenrat. This institution was charged with organizing social assistance for Jews in the initial months of the war. The 48-year-old Nebenzahl was a local tradesman and the prewar leader of the kehilla. 
The Judenrat census shows that at the end of November 1940 there were 494 Jews living in Czudec, including 83 newcomers. By February 1941, the number of newcomers had risen to 123, but the total number of Jews had declined to 476. The newcomers, most of them transferred by the German authorities via Rzeszów, were originally from Kalisz, Łódź, Kraków, Silesia, and various places in Germany. An estimated 80 percent of all Jews in Czudec were in need of some sort of support. 
The winter and spring correspondence of 1941 between the Czudec Judenrat and the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) office in Kraków, referring to the establishment of the official branch of the JSS in Czudec, indicates that the Judenrat, consisting of adversaries of the local Hasidim, sought to prevent them from taking charge of the organization. The three initial nominees pushed by the Hasidim (Zachariasz Jaffe, Szabse Herzig, and Samuel Engelberg) were deemed by the Judenrat to be “inadequate”; e.g., Engelberg, “despite his wealth pays his contributions only when forced.” Seeking to change the committee’s composition, the Czudec Judenrat had to fight Jaffe and Herzig’s supporter, Schmid, who was described by the Judenrat chairman as having “conjured up on the spot the surnames of his Hasidim, who for nearly a year and a half had not lifted their noses to see the light of day.”
By May 1941, the following were at last included in the committee: 37-year-old Szabse Herzig and two tradesmen, Jakub Nebenzahl and 43-year-old Pinkas Chajes. That same month, Nebenzahl was replaced by Samuel Engelberg, whose position was taken in August 1941 by a native of Rymanów, Izrael Iser Citronenbaum. Throughout most of that year, Czudec was entitled to 4 percent of the total amount of welfare distributed among all the localities in Kreis Reichshof by the JSS. A soup kitchen was opened on the market square only in September 1941, serving up to 100 meals daily. 
According to the records of the Czudec Judenrat, a total of 499 Jews were residing in Czudec in June 1941, increasing to 503 three months later. The same source indicates that 119 children under 18 years of age were living in Czudec that summer. Of that number, 14 were under 3 years old, 33 were 3 to 7 years old, 42 were 7 to 14 years old, and 30 were 14 to 18 years old. 
There is no information concerning health or diseases among Czudec’s Jews, however, it is known that there was no pharmacy in the village. By the summer of 1941, there was still no hospital or ambulatory clinic established there. 
As regards Jewish labor conscription in Czudec, most of the surviving records refer to the summer months of 1941. At that time, only 11 Jewish businesses remained open with permission from the Germans, most of these being tailors and cobblers. Twenty-six Jewish laborers performed forced labor within the community and another 41 in labor camps outside of the village. The nature of their work and possible compensation – if any – is unknown. What is known is that between July and the end of October 1941, the so-called “Administration of the Czudec Estate” employed 35 Jews in agriculture. It is not clear whether their status was that of forced laborers and whether, as such, they were included in the statistics for “laboring Jews” cited in this paragraph, either as Jewish peasants working their own fields, or simply as hired agriculture workers.  
Only one source, Pinkas ha-kehilot, dates and briefly describes the establishment of a ghetto in Czudec between late 1941 and the beginning of 1942. The Czudec ghetto was unfenced and the German authorities let the Jews remain in their existing residential area; however, permission was required to leave the village. Those laboring outside of the village limits did so with explicit permission from the employment office. The relatively vague time frame and description of the ghetto provided in the Pinkas ha-kehilot publication is consistent with evidence regarding other small ghettos in the vicinity. 
On March 20, 1942, 80 Jews from the nearby village of Lubenia were resettled to Czudec. An unknown number of Jews from other neighboring settlements soon followed. By April 4, 1942, 52 Jews suitable for labor had been selected and sent to a work camp. The local JSS committee complained to their headquarters in Kraków that they were now the sole support for the women and children that remained. The transfer of Jews from smaller to larger Jewish settlements, followed by roundups of Jews for labor camps, serve as the two main indicators for the existence of several smaller ghettos within Kreis Reichshof. 
Eighteen Kennkarten (identification cards issued by German authorities, with corresponding colors based on ethnicity) designating their holders as “Poles” were obtained with the cooperation of a Polish employee and two staffers within the Czudec gmina registration office. Nine of the identification cards were issued for the following Czudec residents: Henryk Tewel, Ewa Tewel, Gołda Speiser, Simon Götrel, Chaim Goback, Mozes Heffer, Naftali Engelberg, Naftali Jaffa, and a man known only by his first name, Berl; the other Kennkarten were issued to Jews from Pstrągowa, Lubenia, and Wyżne. 
Kreis Reichshof was chosen by the Germans to be one of the first to become “Judenrein” (free of Jews) in Distrikt Krakau. Several of the ghettos in the Kreis were liquidated between June 25 and 27, 1942, when their inhabitants were relocated to the Rzeszów ghetto. Czudec’s Jews were most likely among the Jews transferred at this time. A series of railroad transports organized in July 1942, destined for the Bełżec extermination camp, practically emptied the Rzeszów ghetto of most of its inhabitants. 
Sources:
Publications containing some information regarding the fate of the small Jewish community of Czudec include the following: E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O Zagładzie Żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004); and Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984).
This entry is based mostly on documents that can be found in the following Archives: AŻIH (210/311A (AJDC Czudec); 211/336-337 (JSS Czudec), 211/922, 211/925, 211/933 (JSS Rzeszów)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 20); and VHF (# 45091).
Jolanta Kraemer
Dąbrowa Tarnowska 
Pre-1939: Dąbrowa Tarnowska,  town, Dąbrowa powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Dabrowa Tarnowska, Kreis Tarnow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Dąbrowa Tarnowska, województwo małopolskie, Poland
The town of Dąbrowa Tarnowska is located about 80 kilometers (50 miles) east-northeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, there were about 2,400 Jews living in Dąbrowa Tarnowska. 
German troops entered the town on September 8, 1939. In October 1939, Dąbrowa Tarnowska was incorporated into Kreis Tarnow in Distrikt Krakau. Within Kreis Tarnow, Dąbrowa Tarnowska became the administrative center of its own Landgemeinde.  Anti-Jewish Aktions in Kreis Tarnow, including Dąbrowa Tarnowska, were organized and carried out by the Security Police detachment (Sipo-Aussendienststelle) in Tarnów, which served under the Commanding Officer of the Security Police and SD (KdS) in Kraków. The German Gendarmerie and Polish auxiliary police also took part in the Aktions against the local Jewish population.
Between 1939 and 1941, the German occupying authorities in Dąbrowa Tarnowska implemented a number of anti-Jewish policies. Jewish property was confiscated; the Jews were registered, ordered to wear patches and armbands bearing the Star of David, and were forbidden from leaving the limits of the town, performing ritual slaughter of animals, or trading with the non-Jewish population. Many were obliged to perform various forms of heavy physical labor. The Germans had established a Jewish council (Judenrat) by early in 1940, which was headed by Dr. Neuberger. The Judenrat took measures to meet the basic needs of the Jewish community. It organized a communal kitchen, which in May 1941 provided more than 7,000 meals; it distributed shoes and clothing, and it provided some means of financial support to the needy. The Judenrat also assisted those Jews who from December 1941, were sent to work in the labor camps in Pustków and Mielec.
By June 1941, as a result of the resettlement of many Jews from western Poland, including the city of Kraków, the total number of Jews in Dąbrowa rose to 3,200. Following the influx of refugees, sanitary conditions for the Jews seriously deteriorated. In January 1941, an epidemic of typhus broke out, and Jews were forbidden to leave their homes. The town remained sealed off for two months, during which the Jewish population was on the verge of starvation, and provisions had to be smuggled in. By September 1941, the Jewish population in the town had declined to 3,091. In January 1942, another epidemic of typhus broke out. Despite the efforts of the Judenrat to obtain medical supplies and funds to treat and cure those infected, the hospital was only able to function intermittently. 
At the end of April 1942, around 20 Jews accused of being communist activists, were shot as part of a larger Aktion against alleged members of leftist movements that was carried out by the Security Police throughout the region. In June 1942, in an attempt to spare as many Jews as possible from being conscripted for forced labor, the Judenrat created a workshop that employed 412 workers. That month, the Germans demanded a large “contribution” from the Jews, which was to be comprised mainly of cash, furniture, and appliances. The contribution was paid in full, in the hope that this would avert a large deportation Aktion. However, a few days later, a detachment of the Security Police and an associated deportation Sonderkommando from Tarnów surrounded the town in the early hours of the morning. They rounded up the Jews in the town square and selected about 450 for deportation to Bełżec extermination camp. Men of the Sonderkommando shot about 50 elderly people on the spot during the Aktion. Many people avoided the roundup by hiding in the woods and in underground bunkers.
Towards the end of June 1942, the German authorities established an enclosed ghetto in Dąbrowa Tarnowska. Between June 15 and June 23, 1942, Jews were resettled from the villages and small towns of Kreis Tarnów to Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Tarnów, and several other, newly established ghettos. On July 17, a second Aktion was carried out in Dąbrowa Tarnowska. Around 1,800 Jews who had been concentrated in the town’s ghetto from the surrounding area were deported to Bełżec; the German police forces shot nearly 100 people on the spot during the Aktion. 
The third Aktion took place on September 18, 1942. Although the Germans had intended to liquidate the ghetto on that day a large number of people were able to hide. During this third Aktion, the Germans deported 500 people, and shot 10 others, including the head of the Judenrat. In the days that followed many people returned to the town from hiding, and a “small ghetto” was established. Suddenly on October 1, 1942, the German forces again descended on the town and deported 900 people to Bełżec. On October 6, the Germans rounded up 600 more people, many of whom had been hiding in bunkers, and they shot some 20 people. Around 30 Jews were left in the ghetto to clear out remaining property. Some of them were later taken to the Tarnów ghetto, while the Germans murdered the others at the Jewish cemetery on December 20, 1942. 
Although the ghetto was officially liquidated in 1942, between July and August 1943, more than 250 Jews were killed by the Gestapo in and around Dąbrowa. From October to December 1943, members of the Gestapo and the SS shot another 228 Jews in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, who had been in hiding. In 1944, there were at least two documented incidents in which members of the Gendarmerie and the SS shot Polish women and the Jewish families they had been hiding. 
Sources:
Information on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish population of Dąbrowa Tarnowska can be found in the following publications: Dąbrowa Tarnowska: Zarys dziejow miasta i powiatu (Warsaw, 1974); S. Zabierowski, Pustków. Hitlerowskie obozy wyniszczenia w słuźbie poligonu SS (Rzeszów, 1981); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 107-111; A. Pietrzykowa, Region tarnowski w okresie okupacji hitlerowskiej. Polityka okupanta i ruch oporu (Warsaw: PWN, 1984); E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O Zagładzie Żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, pp. 87-109.
Documents describing the fate of the Jews of Dąbrowa Tarnowska can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1209, 1637, and 2348); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.0124 (AŻIH, JSS), reels 47 and 48); VHF (# 20597 and # 43549); and YVA.
Caterina Crisci
Dębica 
Pre-1939; Dębica (Yiddish: Dembitz), town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Debica, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Dębica, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Dębica is located about 110 kilometers (69 miles) east of Kraków. In 1921, about 40 percent of the town’s population was Jewish (1,564 individuals out of 3,922 inhabitants).
The Germans captured Dębica on Friday September 8, 1939. On October 26, Dębica became part of the Generalgouvernement, which was ruled by Gouverneur Hans Frank. In the first weeks of the occupation, the German authorities introduced a series of anti-Jewish measures, which included the seizure of much of their moveable property, the imposition of forced labor, and a ban on visiting public places. Jewish social organizations and community institutions were closed down and their property confiscated. However, during this initial period many Jewish businesses continued to function, and Jews were still able to use public transportation. The most onerous burden was the imposition of forced labor. Jews worked as cleaners and orderlies in offices and military barracks, others were made to clean the streets and to clear up the ruins resulting from the German bombardments.
The German civil authorities in Dębica, under Kreishauptmann Dr. Auswald, initially made most key decisions regarding the Jewish community. The Gestapo, headed by a man named Gabler, only became more closely involved once the ghetto was established. In November 1939, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was created, under the leadership of Tovia Zucker. The Judenrat was responsible for providing the daily quota of men for forced labor. In addition, it had to collect Jewish property and valuables in order to meet the “contributions” demanded by the Germans. Forced labor entailed road construction and work in factories repairing locomotives and railway cars. At work the Jews were frequently beaten and abused by the overseers. Some young Jews tried to escape and flee to the east. However, restrictions on obtaining Soviet citizenship soon forced many to return to Dębica. 
In the spring of 1940, the German authorities conducted a census, which they used to register those Jews capable of performing forced labor. In June 1940, a group of young Jewish men was sent to the labor camp in Pustków. In April and May, the Waffen-SS had established a military training camp there using Jewish labor. Many smaller labor camps were established around the camp, where Jews and Poles were exploited as forced laborers until 1944. The Judenrat was required to provide food, utensils, and blankets for the inmates, which helped many of them to survive. During the course of the year, bribes enabled the Dębica Judenrat to obtain the return of some forced laborers from Pustków.
During the winter of 1940-1941, conditions for the Jews in Dębica deteriorated steadily. The Germans imposed further restrictions on Jewish movement; they looted Jewish property; and they demanded large “contributions.” The Judenrat established a communal kitchen to help needy people obtain warm food. However, at this time, most Jews were still allowed to reside in their own homes. Due to internal differences, the head of the Jewish council, Tovia Zucker, was replaced by Yosef Traub.
From the beginning of 1941, discussions began between the Jewish council and the local town administration regarding the establishment of a “Jewish residential area.” The area chosen for the ghetto was in one of the poorest and most run-down parts of town near the marketplace.  Some Polish families were removed from this area to make way for the Jews. Most probably during the early months of 1941, about 2,200 Jews from Dębica were settled into the ghetto. Since the living space in the ghetto was inadequate, small wooden huts were built at the edge of the ghetto, each of which had to accommodate about 20 people.  
By the summer of 1942, the ghetto was enclosed by a barbed wire fence. Only individuals with special permits were allowed to leave the area. Jews caught outside the ghetto or in the process of smuggling food were shot in the Jewish cemetery. By July 1942, the influx of Jews from surrounding towns had brought the number of Jews in the ghetto to more than 4,000 people. The Jewish council was given the impossible task of finding housing for all the ghetto’s residents. Due to the extreme overcrowding, sanitary conditions deteriorated. It became urgent for the ghetto residents to halt the spread of epidemic disease by organizing medical care and establishing an isolation hospital for the severely ill. Dr. Mantzer, Dr. Idek, and Dr. Tau treated the patients in this small hospital. 
Even under the harsh conditions of the ghetto, some religious Jews managed to maintain an active underground Yeshiva. Awareness of the expulsions from neighboring settlements increased anxiety among Jews in the Dębica ghetto, as they suspected that their turn would come soon. Some of the Jews working in factories outside the ghetto started to look for hiding places and attempted to make contact with non-Jewish acquaintances. 
The first large Aktion probably took place at the end of July 1942. One or two days before, many Jews from the neighboring villages and towns, including Sedziszów, Ropczyce, Pilzno, Radomysł Wielki, and Baranów, were brought into the Dębica ghetto, following Aktions conducted to clear those places of Jews. This was part of a large-scale deportation Aktion throughout Kreis Debica, during which up to 12,000 Jews were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp and murdered. Dębica was chosen as the main point of concentration because of its location on the main railroad towards Bełżec, as well as its status as the center of the Kreis. SS-units, in collaboration with the Polish auxiliary (Blue) Police, surrounded the ghetto and ordered the Jewish council to collect all the work permits of the Jews, ostensibly for the purpose of renewing them. The Jews had to gather at the main square in the ghetto for the selection. The Jews were told that only the most essential and skilled workers would be issued new work permits; all the others were to be sent to work “in the east.” Those without work permits were sent to a second collection point directly below the Każynca Lunka.  Following the selection, Gestapo men, assisted by the Polish Police and members of the Jewish Police, searched the houses in the ghetto, looking for any Jews in hiding. Those found were taken to the Jewish cemetery and shot immediately. The Jews who received valid work permits were ordered to return to their homes in the ghetto. Approximately 200 people were taken from the group to be deported to the “east.” In fact, they were sent to Lisa Góra near the village of Wielice and shot. 
Shortly after this initial selection, those Jews with new work permits were divided into three groups: one group was sent to work in the Messerschmidt aircraft factory in Rzeszów and the Heinkel aircraft factory in Mielec, another was transferred to the Pustków labor camp; and several hundred Jews remained in the ghetto. As a result of these selections, a group of approximately 2,000 Jews from the Dębica ghetto were sent along with several thousand of the Jews who had just arrived in Dębica from the surrounding towns to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Following this first large-scale Aktion, a number of Jews who had found refuge with Polish families or who had gone into hiding returned secretly to the ghetto. The survivors of this Aktion worked hard, hoping that their useful contribution to the German war effort might save their lives. In the autumn of 1942, about 600 Jews were still registered in the Dębica ghetto, which was now reduced in size. The Jews went to work every day outside the ghetto, which was guarded externally by the Polish Blue Police. The official food rations for ghetto residents consisted mainly of a thin watery soup occasionally containing a morsel of potato or cabbage.  Therefore, in spite of the danger, a number of Jews tried to barter items for food from non-Jews or scavenge vegetables by sneaking out of the ghetto. In November 1942, Kreishauptmann Schlüter (Dr. Auswald’s successor) published a proclamation stating that as of December 1, 1942, any person giving shelter to Jews outside the enclosed camps would face the death penalty. 
On December 15-16, 1942, the Germans conducted another large-scale Aktion against the ghetto residents at Każynza Lunka. At this time, the ghetto was to be liquidated and only those working for the railway factory were to be retained in what was now to be a forced labor camp, in which the Jewish elder was the notorious Jewish policeman Immerglick. As a result, many Jews tried to obtain a spot there by bribing the new Jewish leadership.  When the Aktion started, the railway factory workers were separated from the rest. Almost all the remaining people, including the families of the railway factory workers, were deported to Bełżec. During this Aktion, conducted mainly by members of the Ukrainian Sonderdienst, the Jewish Police (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) again assisted the Germans in the hope of saving themselves. Many Jews tried to escape from the deportation trains, but most were shot by the guards.
Some Jews who survived the Aktion tried to return to the forced labor camp, but the Jewish Police (at this time led by Immerglick) did not allow them inside. It was already an open secret that the German authorities planned to liquidate the Dębica forced labor camp soon. At the beginning of 1943, the last surviving Jews of the neighboring Jewish communities were brought into the camp. The number of inmates increased to approximately 1,600. One group of 50 “illegal” Jews was handed over by the camp leadership and shot immediately. Other Jews without valid permits fled into the Bochnia ghetto, where they shared the fate of its residents.  All were sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp in September 1943. The liquidation of the forced labor camp in Dębica started in April 1943. Up to then, the Jews had continued to work in the railway factory and in construction. At this time, the last camp inmates were transferred to a labor camp near Kraków or to other camps. 
As Soviet troops approached the area in 1944, the remaining labor camps were liquidated, and the prisoners, including a number of former inmates of the Dębica ghetto, were transported to a variety of forced labor and concentration camps further west. Some Jews survived by hiding with Polish families or fleeing to the woods. The precise number of Jews from the Dębica ghetto who survived until the end of the war is not known.
Sources:
Information on the history and fate of the Jewish population of Dębica can be found in the following publications: Daniel Leibel, ed., Sefer Dembitz (Tel Aviv: Irgun yots’e Dembits be-Yisrael, 1960); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 119-124; and Irene Eber, The Choice: Poland 1939-1945 (New York: Schocken, 2004).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Dębica can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/378); FVA (# 627); IPN; USHMM (RG-15.019M); VHF; and YVA (e.g., M-1/E/89, 1294, 1597, and 2490; and O-3/705).
Katrin Reichelt
Dobromil
Pre-1939: Dobromil, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1941: L’vov oblast’, Ukrainian SSR; 1941-1944: Kreis Przemysl, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1991: raion center, L’viv oblast’, Ukraine
Dobromil is located 94 kilometers (59 miles) southwest of Lwów. By 1921, there were 2,119 Jews living in Dobromil, constituting 61.7 percent of the total population. German forces briefly occupied the town in September 1939. Following the Soviet attack on Poland on September 17, 1939, the town was incorporated into the Soviet Union. The Germans reoccupied Dobromil on June 28, 1941.
From the Security Police outpost in Jasło, the Germans transferred Gestapo officials Walter Augustin, Max Lehmann, and Paul Pettirsch to a branch of the Grenzpolizeikommissariat (Border Police Office (of the Security Police)) that was set up in November 1941 in Dobromil. In addition, a German Gendarmerie unit and a Ukrainian police post were established there. 
The first Aktion against the Jewish population took place on June 30, 1941. It was prompted by the discovery of the bodies of several hundred Ukrainians who had been killed by the NKVD prior to the Soviet retreat. Einsatzgruppen report no. 24 of July 16, 1941, stated that: “Eighty-two bodies, including four Jews, were found in the Dobromil jail. The Jews had been Bolshevik informers; they were eliminated as accomplices. Near Dobromil was an abandoned salt mine shaft 80 meters (262 feet) deep completely filled with bodies. Close by was a mass grave measuring 6 by 15 meters (20 by 49 feet). The number of people killed in and near Dobromil amounted to several hundred… The Russians and Jews had carried out the slaughter by extraordinarily brutal means… In Dobromil, both men and women were killed with sledge hammers used to stun livestock…” 
In retribution, antisemitic sentiment among the Ukrainians provoked a pogrom in the town, during the course of which Ukrainians set synagogues on fire and beat and robbed many Jews. Local Ukrainians rounded up several hundred Jews on the market square. Members of Einsatzkommando 6, headed by SS-Standartenführer Dr. Kröger, took away 132 of them and shot them at the salt-mine shaft.  According to the Dobromil yizkor book, there were some 50 Jewish victims in total.
The Germans established a district Jewish council (Judenrat) in Dobromil that was given authority over the other Jewish councils in several nearby places, namely in Chyrów, Rybotycze, and Nowe Miasto. The Dobromil Judenrat was subordinated to the Jewish council for the Kreis based in Przemyśl.  The Judenrat included Joseph Miller, Leib Teitelbaum, and two attorneys, Reiner and Karton. The German authorities carried out the registration of Dobromil’s Jews and they were required to report for various kinds of forced labor, including street cleaning, gardening, and lumber work. The Judenrat was charged with organizing this Jewish labor. Many of the forced laborers were mistreated by the Ukrainian guards; there are reports that they hitched Jews to wagons as ‘workhorses.’
In October 1941, the German authorities created a Jewish “residential area” – i.e. an open ghetto – in Dobromil.  The town’s Jews were evicted from several parts of the town and were confined to an area around the old market square, most likely including Szewska and Salinarna streets. From this time, any Jews caught leaving Dobromil without permission could by punished with the death penalty. Permission to move freely was granted solely to the Judenrat members, the Jewish Police, and some professionals employed by the Germans. In addition, garbage collectors officially could leave and enter the ghetto, but many of them were murdered by Ukrainian collaborators.
In November 1941, when pleading for support from the headquarters of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) in Kraków, the local Judenrat wrote: “Our community, affected by two years of Bolshevik administration and changes, is unable to remedy our misery on its own.” By December 1941, there were 2,400 Jews living in the Dobromil ghetto, of which one third were in need of assistance.  
German regulations required that Jews wear an armband bearing an emblem of the Star of David. The Germans also confiscated most of the Jews’ valuables, and deprived them of many basic rights.  This included prayers, which were conducted in secret in the house of Rabbi Zeydah on Szewska Street. 
On February 21, 1942, the Judenrat opened a soup kitchen, which initially distributed 300 meals a day. One hundred were sold for 0.30 zloty per meal; the remainder was distributed free of charge. 
In March 1942, on the orders of the Kreishauptmann in Przemyśl, the Judenrat staff was doubled from 5 to 10 members. At this time, its chairman was I. Koritan; his deputy was a man named Belemer.  Between April 1942 and the ghetto’s liquidation in July 1942, the Judenrat spent much of its energy unsuccessfully trying to open various workshops – especially one for knitted goods – to make the unemployed Jewish youth productive.   
In late July 1942, Jews living in the vicinity (including those in Nowe Miasto) were ordered to move to the Dobromil ghetto; e.g. the Jews of Kwaszenica were informed of the transfer one week in advance. On arrival at the entrance gate, the Gestapo searched their belongings and confiscated most of them along with any money. Next, the Germans selected 400 to 500 able-bodied men and separated them from other Jews in the ghetto. They were later marched to labor camps in Przemyśl.  
The liquidation of the ghetto took place on July 29, 1942, when 3,166 Jews were gathered at a stadium located near the railway station. From here, the Germans deported them by train to the Bełżec extermination camp. Several Jewish “specialists” remained in the town with their families. According to the yizkor book, as many as 500 Jews remained in Dobromil. This number included the Judenrat members Miller and Karton, as well as Jewish policemen, who bribed the Germans to let them remain. They were forced to dig their own graves before they were killed on November 24, 1942, at the Lichtman sawmill in Dobromil. The site was later ploughed over to cover any traces of the killings. A few hundred Jews who had hidden prior to the deportation Aktion were captured and killed in the course of 1942 and 1943.  Only a small number of Jews from the town managed to survive.
Sources:
Relevant publications regarding the Jewish community in Dobromil and the ghetto there include: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, Vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 150-153, 232, 336; M. Gelbart, ed., Sefer zikaron le-zekher Kehilat Dobromil ve-Nayshtut (Tel Aviv: Irgun Dobromil ve-Nayshtut be-Yirsrael, 1964); and Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), p. 317.
Documentation regarding the persecution and murder of the Jews of Dobromil can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/360); BA-L (ZStL, 206 AR-Z 39/1960, 206 AR-Z 865/1971, SA 337, SA 566); DALO; GARF (7021-58-20); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS)); VHF (e.g., # 2409, 32667); and YVA.
Jolanta Kraemer and Alexander Kruglov 
trans. Ilya Bourtman
Dukla
Pre-1939: Dukla, town, Krosno powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Dukla is located 80 kilometers (50 miles) south of Rzeszów on the Jasiołka River. In 1921, the Jewish population consisted of 1,509 people, 72 percent of the total population. On the eve of World War II, the Jewish population of Dukla was about 1,650. 
German troops occupied Dukla on September 8, 1939. By then, many Jews had already fled to the east, and some of them subsequently remained in what soon became the Soviet occupied zone of Poland. From the start, German soldiers terrorized the Jews by shaving off the beards of religious Jews and seizing Jewish men for forced labor. During the first phase of the occupation, the Germans ordered those Jews who were not skilled laborers to cross the San River. A group of Jews obeyed this order, entering the Soviet zone, while others went into hiding, and only around 100, mostly more wealthy, families remained in the town. In 1940, the Soviet authorities deported many of the recent refugees from Dukla into the Soviet interior, such that at least 100 of them survived the war. 
By early 1940, the Germans had established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Dukla, which had to organize the daily quota of forced laborers.  The Germans imposed various restrictions on the Jewish population. Jews had to register and wear the Star of David at all times. In addition, they had to obey a curfew and were forbidden to leave the town; and they were harassed, beaten, and subjected to random shootings. Most Jewish property was either, seized and handed to non-Jews, or became part of the many “contributions” demanded by the Germans from the Judenrat. 
 In May 1941, 1,476 Jews were registered by the Judenrat in Dukla, reflecting the influx of a number of refugees from nearby villages and other towns in German-occupied Poland. At this time, 135 Jews worked as forced laborers on road construction and other tasks for the Germans.  Many of the Jews in Dukla worked at the stone quarry about 3 kilometers (1.8 miles) outside the town. The manager of the quarry Karol Marcinkowski treated the Jewish workers badly, beating the weaker ones, although he was susceptible to bribes. Until August 1942, these Jewish laborers lived in the town and marched to the worksite every day in a column supervised by Chaskiel Goldman and Hersch Ehrenreich. The laborers worked 10 hours per day for only 15 or 20 złoty per week, plus meager rations comprising one loaf of bread and a little jam or sugar. 
In June 1941, a branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), headed by L. Werner, was established in Dukla. Its main task was to provide the Jewish population with medical supplies, financial aid, and childcare. The public kitchen was run by the local Judenrat, which by 1942 was headed by Simon Stoff. In order to combat an outbreak of typhus in the region, the Jewish council in Krosno issued instructions in December 1941 to the Jews in Dukla to bathe regularly with soap. 
In the spring of 1942, all the Jews in Dukla were concentrated into one specific area, which one source describes as an enclosed ghetto, although it may have remained open until August 1942.  In mid-August 1942, the Gestapo based in Krosno assisted by the Order Police conducted an Aktion in Dukla, shortly after the Aktion in Krosno on August 10, 1942. It is probable that Jews from the surrounding towns and villages, such as Jaśliska, were brought into Dukla just prior to the Aktion, as by this time the number of Jews is estimated to have been more than 2,000.  On the morning of August 13, the Germans drove the Jews out of their houses to the market place (Rynek). Some of those who tried to hide or were too sick to move were shot on the spot. Then Marcinkowski participated in the selection of about 300 Jews, mostly boys and young men to remain in Dukla as forced laborers. The remaining Jews were divided into two groups. The women and children, probably more than 1,000 people were deported by train to the Bełżec extermination camp.  The elderly and the sick (about 400 people) were also separated and taken to a nearby forest, where they were shot, probably together with several hundred elderly Jews selected in Rymanów, Jaśliska, and other places. In total, the Germans murdered around 800 mostly elderly Jews at this time in the forest near Barwinek to the south of Dukla. 
The 300 or so remaining Jewish workers were put into two Jewish forced labor camps in Dukla, established following the deportation Aktion. The labor camps belonged to the German construction firms of Artur Walde (Breslau) that had about 140 forced laborers and Emil Ludwig (Munich) with about 170, both established in mid-August 1942.  One survivor describes these two forced labor camps as the “ghetto,” which consisted of four or five buildings located in two different neighborhoods of the town that were guarded by the Polish (Blue) Police.  In November 1942, the Artur Walde camp was liquidated and the 200 or so Jewish workers there were sent to another forced labor camp near Kraków.  A short time later, probably in December 1942, the Fa. Emil Ludwig camp was dissolved and the forced laborers were sent to Rzeszów.  Only about 50 Jews from Dukla survived the German occupation in the camps or in hiding.
Sources:
Information on the history of the Jewish community of Dukla and its fate during the Holocaust can be found in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 111-114.
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Dukla can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1757, 3236 and 3448); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reels 21 and 32; RG-50.002*0028; and RG-15.019M, reel 17); VHF (# 18425); and YVA.
Caterina Crisci
Działoszyce
Pre-1939: Działoszyce, town, Miechów powiat, Kielce województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Dzialoszyce, Kreis Miechow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Działoszyce, województwo świętokrzyskie, Poland
Działoszyce is located about 50 kilometers (31 miles) northeast of Kraków. In 1939, it is estimated that about 7,000 Jews lived there (80 percent of the total population). 
German forces occupied the town on September 8, 1939. Refugees with relatives in Działoszyce returned from other towns (Zaglębie, Kraków, Pinczów, and Łódź). The German authorities enacted anti-Jewish legislation as soon as the fighting ended. Jewish shops and merchandise were confiscated, and the Jewish populace was forbidden to transact business. For most of the occupation there was no permanent German police force stationed in the town, which somewhat diminished the daily pressure (and may be the reason many former residents returned from other areas). The German district authorities (office of the Kreishauptmann) were based in Miechów, about 25 kilometers (16 miles) away. By the winter of 1940-1941, the Jewish population of Działoszyce had reached 10,000, two-thirds of them penniless refugees. Housing conditions were abysmal, with hundreds crowded into public buildings and institutions with no sanitary facilities or running water. Almost 1,000 people were crammed into the synagogue and adjoining Bet Midrash (study hall). The situation worsened in September 1941, when another 300 refugees were transferred to Działoszyce from Miechów. 
The Jewish council (Judenrat) evolved from the leadership of the kehillah (Jewish community council), headed by Moshe Yosef Kruk. It served as an address for the Germans, both for implementing the unending flow of anti-Jewish orders and for satisfying the appetites of the local officials. The members of the Judenrat were made personally responsible for enforcing all German orders. Among the most notorious extortionists were Kriminalobersekretär Bayerlein head of the Gestapo office in Miechów, and others such as Schmidt, Vogt, Becker, and Reginer, as well as Gendarmes such as Kosko, Dachauer-Kornhäuser, and Schubert.  They demanded numerous “contributions,” and everything of value had to be turned in: gold, silver, jewelry, foreign currency, radios, furs, and the like.  The Judenrat’s basic strategy was that by fulfilling German demands they would delay or avert impending danger. One of the results was constant conflict within the community. Commenting on this situation, the yizkor book concludes: “one must always remember the factors involved in daily life, which caused the ordinary Jews to view it [the Judenrat] with suspicion. I am certain that in our town it functioned only in order to handle those difficulties produced by the times and the circumstances.” 
The Judenrat had to face the danger of epidemics and disease. Dr. Grambovsky was the only doctor in town, but in 1940 Dr. Dvora Lazar arrived from Kraków. In addition to overseeing medical services for 10,000 people, this heroic Jewish physician established sanitary measures to head off epidemics and the spread of contagious diseases. Disinfection stations were set up and a sanitation committee made rounds to fumigate buildings with sulfur and other disinfectants. In 1941, there were simultaneous outbreaks of dysentery, typhoid, and typhus, but they were somehow contained. There were many deaths, but the news was never reported to the German authorities, as they were known to take drastic measures in such instances. In November, the hospital that had been set up in Skalbmierz to deal with patients from the two communities was transferred to Działoszyce. 
The Judenrat had to supply workers for various work tasks in and around the town. All men over age 14 were taken to labor camps or pressed into forced labor, digging ditches and sewage canals. The German labor chief, named Mucha, worked with the Judenrat’s labor department, headed by Mr. Hoffmann, to establish a rotation schedule for all able-bodied men. For many the meager pay was the only source of income. Families with more resources paid substitutes a few coins to replace them in the forced labor gangs. Periodically German Police would show up to seize a few dozen young people and send them to labor camps near Kraków or to work in the factories of the German firm Richard Strauch. Sometimes the Judenrat’s Jewish policemen (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) were called upon to enforce the demands for Jewish forced labor. 
The most extraordinary effort of the beleaguered community was the communal kitchen, which was established when the first refugees arrived. Members of the Zionist youth movements went door to door to collect funds, clothing, bedding, and items of furniture for them. At the beginning of 1940, one wing of the Bet Midrash was opened as a public kitchen and dining hall. At first only a few hundred refugees ate there, but over time it became the most important institution in town, providing a hot daily mail for thousands. Some of the food came from the rations allocated to the Judenrat by the authorities, but the rest had to be obtained by other means, legitimate or not so legitimate. The kitchen functioned for two and a half years, until the final liquidation of the community in the autumn of 1942. 
During the early years, some assistance was available from the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC), which continued to operate in Poland until the U.S. entered the war. In 1940, the AJDC supplied Passover matzot for Polish Jewry. Although travel was forbidden, two young men hired a wagon and got to Częstochowa to bring back the matzot. 
Some secondary sources refer to a “ghetto” in Działoszyce from March of 1940,  but primary sources indicate that the Jews continued to live in their own homes right up to the main deportation Aktion in September 1942 and that no fence was ever constructed to contain the Jews. As already noted, due to the influx of many refugees, Działoszyce became a collecting point for Jews in overcrowded conditions from early 1940. A curfew was strictly enforced at night and several accounts stress that “it was forbidden to go beyond the limits of the town.”  By 1942, leaving the town to barter with the peasants was punishable by death. Nonetheless many Jews felt compelled to leave the town in order to obtain a little extra food for their families, and some of them paid for this with their lives. 
Since the Jews gradually became subject to ever more stringent movement restrictions and harsh living conditions, some survivors have described Działoszyce as a kind of “open ghetto.” Szlama Leszman, who mostly lived outside of Działoszyce, as a partisan with the underground resistance of the Polish Socialist Party, noted that the town was “abnormally overcrowded” with “people living in every attic and basement... The poverty was dire and was accompanied by malnutrition, and this brought about an escalation of illnesses. The town was transformed into a huge Jewish ghetto.”  
In the spring and early summer of 1942, additional Jews were brought into Działoszyce from the surrounding villages, worsening the overcrowding. Despite the isolation, rumors about Aktions in neighboring communities, such as Słomniki, began to spread during the summer of 1942.
On September 3, German armed units surrounded Działoszyce. On the next day, after a night of terror, everyone was instructed to pack a bundle of only 10 to 15 kilograms of personal belongings, including work clothes, and report to the market square.  After the marketplace filled up, horses and carts driven by peasants arrived. People too old or weak to walk to the train station were loaded onto the carts and taken straight to the cemetery. There they were shot with machine guns and buried in three mass graves, about 1,200 to 1,500 victims. Included in this group was the community’s elderly rabbi, Itzhak Halevi Staslovsky. The others were taken by truck from the train station to a huge open field near Miechów, where Jews from other towns, including Książ Wielki and Wodzisław, were also assembled. By the following morning there were approximately 15,000 Jews there. At noon the people were ordered into groups of five, with young men sent to the left (about 2,000) and the rest to the right.  The latter, Jews from Działoszyce as well as neighboring towns, were loaded onto cattle cars and taken by train to the Bełżec extermination camp. The younger group was sent, on the same train, to the Prokocim labor camp near Kraków.
Shortly after their arrival at Prokocim, the Germans sent the Jewish Police from Działoszyce back to the town to collect and clean up what was left behind after local Poles had looted the Jewish houses. When others heard this, they escaped from the camp and also returned. A few Jews who had survived the expulsion by hiding in neighboring villages also slipped into town and the Germans even published announcements allowing them to return to their homes. By the end of October 1942, there were several hundred Jews in Działoszyce. According to Zonenfeld’s account, the Germans rounded up the remaining Jews living scattered in Działoszyce and moved them into the synagogue, and a small Judenrat was created. Now all movement was strictly forbidden, especially on the outskirts of the Jewish residential area. On November 3, German forces returned and began house-to-house searches. Some Jews were shot, the others deported.  
By the end of 1942, a few hundred Jews from Działoszyce were in the Plaszów concentration camp near Kraków, but only a handful survived. A number of Jews from Działoszyce hid during the roundups and fled into the woods around Pinczów, where they formed Jewish partisan units together with other Jewish escapees. However, many of them were killed in February 1944 in a battle near Pawlowice.
Sources:
This entry draws mainly on the yizkor book for the town, Sefer yizkor shel kehilat Dzialoszyce vehaseviva (Tel Aviv: Ha-Menora, 1973). Moshe Beisky’s article provides the most comprehensive summary of the Holocaust period; he also testified at the Eichmann trial in 1961. Two relevant personal memoirs are by Eliahu Raziel (Rozdzial), Alone and in Hiding, trans. Susan Rosenfeld (Moreshet: Mordechai Anilevich Study and Research Center, 1994); and Joseph E. Tenenbaum, Legacy and Redemption: A Life Renewed (Washington DC: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and Holocaust Survivors’ Memoirs Project, 2005).
Documentation on the fate of the Jews of Działoszyce under the German occupation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/118, 1765, and 3260); FVA (# 159 and 169); IPN; ITS; USHMM; VHF; and YVA (Testimony of Alter Lendgarten # 10331 in English).
Samuel Fishman and Martin Dean
Frysztak
Pre-1939: Frysztak, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Frysztak is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, there were 1,322 Jews living in Frysztak.
Units of the German army occupied Frysztak on September 8, 1939 and soon began maltreating the Jews. 
In November 1939, the Germans established a civil administration in the newly formed Generalgouvernement. Frysztak was incorporated into Kreis Jaslo, within Distrikt Krakau. Regierungsrat Dr. Walter Gentz was the Kreishauptmann from February 10, 1941.  The Border Police office (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, GPK), commanded from 1940 to 1943 by SS-Hauptsturmführer Dr. Wilhelm Raschwitz, organized and carried out the large-scale anti-Jewish Aktions in Kreis Jaslo. Stationed in Frysztak was a unit of German Gendarmerie that controlled the Polish (Blue) Police.
In the fall of 1939, the German authorities appointed a Judenrat in Frysztak, headed by a man named Baldinger. The Judenrat controlled a unit of Jewish Police. On April 29, 1940, the Judenrat in Frysztak was placed under the regional Judenrat for Kreis Jaslo. Since all Jews aged 15 to 60 were required to perform forced labor, the Judenrat had to organize work details, as well as coping with refugees, and distributing food. At the end of 1939 there were 1,466 Jews in Frysztak, including 116 refugees; one year later, there were 1,581 Jews, including 202 refugees. The refugees arrived mainly from Śląsk, Kraków, and Łódź. Living conditions for Jews in Frysztak deteriorated rapidly. In 1940, 283 Jews received material aid; and 1,440 received some financial assistance. On September 25, 1940 the Frysztak Judenrat sent an urgent letter to the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization in Kraków, warning of the imminent danger of starvation. 
On June 7, 1941, a branch of the JSS was established in Frysztak, headed by Jakub Braff. It provided help to Jews from Frysztak and Wiśniowa in Kreis Jaslo, and the Jewish community of Odżykoń in Kreis Krosno. In September 1941, out of 1,080 Jews, 400 applied for aid, but the JSS could assist only 325 Jews. 
In April 1941, there were four labor camps around Frysztak, exploiting the labor of local Jews and Jews from Kraków. In mid-May 1941, about 1,000 Jewish forced laborers from the Warsaw ghetto arrived in Frysztak. On July 11, 1941, 150 Jews from Frysztak were sent to the Płaszów labor camp. From July to November 1941, there was a labor camp in Frysztak, located in two synagogues. Approximately 2,000 Jews from Warsaw were held there, supervised internally by a Jewish police force. The Jews worked on road construction and stone quarrying in Cieszyna. The guards mistreated and abused them. Due to overcrowding, typhus spread within the camp and a number of inmates died. After its liquidation, the Germans probably transferred the surviving inmates back to the Warsaw region. 
Reports of the JSS in Frysztak indicate that the Germans had established a “Jewish residential area” (open ghetto) by January 1942. In December 1941, due to the spread of disease, the Germans prohibited Jews from leaving the town, which made it harder to obtain food. Jakub Braff reported that from early January 1942 the town was completely sealed off as a “Jewish residential area.” Signs placed around the town warned that Jews could not leave the limits of the town on pain of death. The only exception was for 250 Jews sent out daily to clear snow from the roads. In addition to refugees from other Polish towns, the Germans brought in Jews from the surrounding villages, shortly before the liquidation of the ghetto. In the spring of 1942, some 200 Jews from Jasło were moved to Frysztak. In total, there were about 1,800 Jews concentrated in Frysztak. 
In January 1942, the Frysztak branch of the JS established a public kitchen, serving 300 dinners per day, which still failed to meet the demand. In May, it set up a separate cafeteria to feed 100 children, but another hundred went hungry. The JSS lacked the resources to sustain the public kitchens, obtain medical supplies, or assist about 100 Jews who had nothing to wear but rags. In 1942, the JSS made attempts to reestablish the town as a center of clothing production, in an effort to forestall further deportations to labor camps. About 100 Jewish tailors produced around 2,000 shirts and over 100 pairs of pants each day. However, in early 1942, the Kreishauptmann vetoed JSS plans to organize agricultural training for Jews. 
On July 2-3, 1942, Gestapo officers under the command of SS-Hauptsturmführer Raschwitz from Jasło organized the first deportation Aktion in Frysztak, assisted by units of the Order Police, Ukrainian, and Polish (Blue) Police. The head of the Frysztak Judenrat was instructed that all of the Jews in Frysztak must assemble in the cattle market between 5:00 and 6:00 A.M. Here the Germans took all their valuables. Certain craftsmen and younger people were selected from a previously prepared list to have their working papers stamped. Men aged 52 or older were loaded onto trucks. Those who could not walk fast enough were beaten. Women with more than two children were also put on the trucks, as well as some individual Jews to complete the transport of some 800 people. The Jews were taken to the Warzyce Forest, stripped naked, and shot into three mass graves, which were filled in by Poles working for the German construction service (Baudienst). Children were seized from mothers and murdered by smashing them against the trucks. The Aktion was completed by 3:00 P.M. According to Mieczysław Chabański, the Kreishauptmann even charged the Kreis Judenrat in Jasło for the cost of transporting people from Frysztak to Warzyce, for ammunition, and for cleaning the Jews’ clothing. 
Following this Aktion, the Gendarmerie hunted down groups of Jews in hiding in and around Frysztak. On August 13, 1942, the Gendarmerie shot 10 Jews, including four children, in Frysztak and Twierdza.  The final liquidation of the Frysztak ghetto took place on August 18, 1942. Some Jews were taken to the Rzeszów ghetto, and 35 Jews were sent to the Przemyśl ghetto after they had been used to clear up the area of the Frysztak ghetto. The rest of the Jewish population was taken to Jasło, and from there they were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp on August 19 and 20. 
As many as 100 Jews escaped the deportation Aktions, mostly by hiding in the surrounding forests. However, due to repeated searches and some denunciations by local Poles, only about 20 of them remained by the end of 1943. 
A number of Poles risked their lives to help Jews. On July 3, 1943, the Germans shot several Poles in the villages of Markuszowa and Kozłówek for aiding Jews.  Eugeniusz Niedziela and his family from Markuszowa were recognized by Yad Vashem as Righteous Among the Nations for assisting the Weitz and Schmidt families, when they fled to the forests following the liquidation Aktions in Frysztak. Among others who helped Jews was Kasper Pilch from the village of Kożuchów, who assisted the Apfelbaum family from Frysztak, and also Michał Świętoń of Niewodna, who saved six members of the Resler family. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Frysztak include the following: “Frysztak,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3 Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 295-298; Itzhok Berglas and Shlomo Yahalomi-Diamand, The Book of Stryzow and vicinity, trans. Harry Langsam (Los Angeles: “Natives of Stryzow Societies” in Israel and the Diaspora, 1990); and Stanisław Zabierowski, Rzeszowskie pod okupacją hitlerowską (Warsaw: Książka i Wiedza, 1975).
Other works relevant to the history and persecution of the Jews in Frysztak include the following: Józef Piętniewicz, Z Przeszłości Frysztaka; Zofia Rusek and Danuta Skóra, Społeczność żydowska w dawnym Strzyżowie i okolicy – historia i wspomnienia (Strzyżów, 2006).
Documents on the extermination of the Jews in Frysztak can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (JM 3968/5568401; 301/1952); BA-L (B-162/14484) IPN (Dsn 13/74/73/”W” 452; Dsn 13/15/67/”W” 393; Dsn 13/216/73/”W” 717; Dsn 13/15/67/”W” 399; and Zh III/31/35/68); MOR (I/43b/V/H, GK 105z/A, t. 1; Bühler case, t. 74); OKBZH-Rz (II Ds 22/70; II Ds 58/68); USHMM (RG-10.027; Acc.1991.099; RG-15.019M, reels 10 and 17; Acc.1997.A.0124, reel 22); USHMMPA (# 76183 and # 76184); VHF; and YVA (e.g., O-3/3602; M-1/E/1690).
Joanna Sliwa
Głogów Małopolski
Pre-1939: Głogów Małopolski, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Glogow, Kreis Reichshof (Rzeszów), Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Głogów Małopolski, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Głogów Małopolski is located 12 kilometers (7.5 miles) north of Rzeszów. There were 648 Jews in Głogów in 1921. On the outbreak of World War II, approximately 600 Jews were residing there.  
The German authorities established a Jewish council (Judenrat) chaired by Symche Hiller. On December 17, 1939 a large group of refugees arrived, mostly from Łódź and Kalisz. A refugee committee established to relieve their situation organized a soup kitchen in the Bet Midrash, but the building was requisitioned shortly afterwards by the German military. From then on, the preparation of meals was divided between eleven private houses cooking approximately 150 meals daily. 
In May 1940, the Judenrat reported 130 Jewish families in Głogów. The number of refugees stood at 104. By June 1940, the number of refugees had risen to 187 bringing the total number of Jewish residents to 806. A similar number, 800 Jews, was reported through November 1940.  
After the German Army abandoned the school building in June 1941, a labor camp for approximately 100 Jews was established on its grounds. Both German and Jewish Police guarded the camp. The prisoners worked cleaning the town, excavating earth, and working in the weapons magazines located in a forest, 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) outside of Głogów. The soldiers who guarded them mistreated the local Jews and extorted valuables and food supplies.
In September 1941, Jews from Raniżów and the surrounding villages of Staniszewskie, Zielonki, and Mazury were deported to Głogów (as well as to Sokołów Małopolski). Most of them were Jewish farmers, whose land the Germans planned to incorporate within their military training grounds. Deportees were permitted take all of their belongings except for livestock. 
At this time, the German Landkomissar Twardon, residing in Kolbuszowa, ordered the Kolbuszowa Judenrat to move 25 Jewish families to Sokołów and Głogów. As a result, a number of farmers from villages surrounding Kolbuszowa (including Kupno and Przewrotne) were transferred to Głogów on October 14, 1941. Those refugees and deportees, who had settled in Głogów in 1939-1940, were simultaneously forced to relocate to barracks in Rzeszów. 
According to A. Potocki, a ghetto was established in Głogów on February 1, 1942. The Kreishauptmann’s order to establish a net of ghettos in the Kreis was issued on December 17, 1941. In Rzeszów, the order was effective from January 10, 1942 with the closing of its ghetto; ghettos in the remainder of the Kreis were to be established by February 1, 1942.
Survivor Edith Kornbluth remembers that the Germans resettled the community to the most neglected part of the town. The ghetto was unfenced. As overcrowding was severe, the Kornbluth family had to share a room with three other families. Her father would sneak out at night to buy food from villagers. The men in the ghetto were subject to forced labor. The system of paying for substitutes to perform assigned labor was initially tolerated, but subsequently became illegal.  
The Jews worked in forestry, agriculture, and road maintenance. A number of the laborers, according to another survivor of the ghetto, Martin Rosenberg, were deported to the Pustków forced labor camp. Rosenberg’s family moved to the Głogów ghetto from Kolbuszowa to improve their living conditions and security.  
As of March 1942, the Schutzpolizei raids became more frequent and deadly. The following murders are registered: four men were shot in March 1942; then between May and June another four persons, including a married couple, were murdered. The source, Rejestr miejsc i faktów zbrodni, notes that some of these murders might have been committed within the ghetto.  
On May 2, 1942, Gazeta Żydowska reported that the number of Jews in Głogów had tripled since the beginning of the war, rising to 1,800. The most recent newcomers were a group of 300 Jews from Kolbuszowa, Raniżów, and Sokołów. There was no soup kitchen in the town and the system of distributing newcomers to private houses had failed due to overcrowding. There were no epidemics, partially because the community maintained a public steam bath. 
Survivor Michel Kruger testified that in May 1942 a number of men were selected by the Germans for the Biesiadka labor camp. 
Two hundred Jews from the Sokołów ghetto were reportedly transferred to Głogów upon Sokołów’s liquidation, which most likely took place on July 27, 1942. 
The ghetto in Głogów was also liquidated in late July 1942; the Jews concentrated there were deported to Rzeszów.  The Rzeszów ghetto was liquidated in the course of deportations to the Bełżec extermination camp that began in July 1942; its final liquidation took place in November 1942. 
Some of Głogów’s Jews were selected for the labor camp in the town’s school. Since its establishment, the camp had been reorganized, holding approximately 120 Jews and Poles. The prisoners were tasked with maintaining the Głogów-Kolbuszowa road. During the camp’s liquidation on October 25, 1942, the Jewish prisoners were sent to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
Sources:
The following publications contain brief references to the destruction of the Głogów ghetto: Tadeusz Kowalski, Obozy hitlerowskie w Polsce południowo-wschodniej, 1939-1945 (Warsaw: Książka i Wiedza, 1973), pp. 103-104; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), pp. 179, 462; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), p. 54-56; Stanisław Poradowski, “Zagład Żydów rzeszowskich,” part 3, in BŻIH, nos. 3-4 (1985), pp. 89-90.
Archival sources can be found in: AŻIH (210/339, 211/402); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), RG-50.002*0140); and VHF (# 569, 12802, 15495, 39769, 43384).
Jolanta Kraemer
Gorlice
Pre-1939: Gorlice, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Gorlice is located about 100 kilometers (62.5 miles) southeast of Kraków. The Jewish population of Gorlice comprised more than 3,400 people on the eve of World War II in 1939.
The German Army occupied the town on September 7, 1939. Almost immediately, the Wehrmacht started seizing Jews for forced labor and stealing their possessions. 
Despite many residents’ flight on the outbreak of the war, the Jewish population of Gorlice increased during the first year of occupation. Jewish refugees from Germany had begun to arrive following the expulsion of Polish Jews just prior to Kristallnacht (November 9-10, 1938) and, after the war started, many Jews from western Poland sought refuge in the eastern part of the country. By the fall of 1940, the Jewish population of Gorlice had grown to 4,000, with another 1,500 living in the smaller surrounding villages.
In the fall of 1939, the German authorities confiscated Jewish workshops and businesses, placing them into fictional “trusteeships” under the direction of local ethnic German (Volksdeutsche) or German managers. For a few months they allowed smaller Jewish shops to remain open, but women ran them, as the men stayed out of sight to avoid being rounded up for forced labor. 
In March 1940, the Germans established a seven-man Judenrat headed by Dr. Henryk Arnold, a local lawyer and Zionist leader. Dr. Jakub Blech, also a lawyer, served as his deputy.  On April 29, 1940, the Gorlice Judenrat was placed under the jurisdiction of the regional Judenrat in Jasło. A Jewish auxiliary police force was also established. The Judenrat was instructed to organize forced labor details, which were made up of requests for between 100 and 300 men per day, and this brought an end to the random kidnappings. Around 200 Jews were sent to work at two sawmills run by the German firm Hobag (Holz-Bearbeitungs A.G.) under a German manager named Girtner. The Jewish forced laborers were supervised by Jewish policemen and a Werkschutz (factory guard) detachment; some Poles worked there as well, and they helped Jews by giving them additional food. Among the finished items produced by Hobag were wooden planks used for the construction of barracks and coffins to transport Germans soldiers killed in action. Some Jewish forced laborers worked at a factory for making tarpaper, owned before the war by a Jew named Fessel, and others worked on road construction projects in the town, for which they received only some soup and the right to receive food coupons.  
The German Landkommissar based in Gorlice was an official named Alfred Koch, who was subordinated to the Kreishauptmann in Jasło (initially Dr. Ludwig Losacker, and then from February 1941, Dr. Walter Gentz). From March 1940, an outpost of the Border Police Office (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, or GPK) in Jasło was established in Gorlice. From December 1941 until March 1944 Kriminalassistent (later Kriminalsekretär) Ernst F. was in charge of this office, assisted by his deputy, Otto Friedrich. In Gorlice there was also a detachment of about eight or ten German Gendarmes (Order Police), which also commanded a larger force of local Polish (Blue) Police.  In 1940, the German authorities instituted a system of hostage taking. As recalled by the survivor Joseph K.: “Ten Jewish men were named as hostages, and their names were posted on placards all over town. Should anything happen to a German, those ten men would be executed.” The hostages changed every 14 days. This system was already in operation in February 1940. Joseph K.’s father was one of those named among the list of 10 hostages posted on June 8, 1940. The hostages were taken on the orders of the Kreishauptmann, Dr. Losacker. Poles were sometimes also named among the hostages. 
The Judenrat organized a soup kitchen to support the many Jews in need. In 1940, a medical clinic was opened, but there were no Jewish doctors left in Gorlice. However, a local Polish doctor, Dr. Otanski, “put aside his antisemitic convictions” and, at great personal risk, tended the Jewish sick. A Jewish refugee doctor from Kraków, Dr. Feldmaus, arrived in 1941. In the fall of 1940 two dental clinics were in operation. When epidemics broke out in late 1941 or early 1942, a small Jewish hospital was opened. 
Despite economic privation, the Jews of Gorlice were able to obtain food smuggled in from neighboring Slovakia, about 30 kilometers (19 miles) away. In July 1941, after the invasion of the Soviet Union, the new Kreishauptmann, Dr. Gentz, ordered the delineation of a ghetto area on the edge of town. About 160 impoverished Jews were expelled from Gorlice to Bobowa. On August 7, another group was shipped to Biecz, Bobowa, and two other towns. By October 1941, the Germans had established the ghetto in Gorlice, which at first remained open. The ghetto consisted of two separate sections located south of the market square (Rynek), which lay outside the ghetto. There was the Dworzyska area: comprised of the present-day Mickiewicza, Nadbrzeżna, Stroma, and Strażacka Streets. This was separated by Mickiewicza Street, which remained open for non-Jewish traffic, from the Garbarnia area of the ghetto: comprised of the present-day Nadbrzeżna, Legionów, Rzeźnicza, and Ogrodowa Streets. In total there were about 3,500 Gorlice Jews residing in the ghetto, plus a growing number of refugees.
The ghetto was guarded by Ukrainian auxiliary police and later also by Polish Police, supervised by the local Gestapo and Gendarmerie. According to Polish sources, some of the Polish policemen were also members of the Polish Home Army (Armia Krajowa) commanded by sergeant Jan Fereński (“Sęp”), and these men abetted the smuggling of food into the ghetto. The Jewish Police was issued with wooden bats made by the Hobag firm to maintain order inside the ghetto. Its commander, a tailor named Keller, is named in some sources as having been an informant of the Gestapo, who kept a close eye on the activities of the Jewish Police. 
The space allocated for the ghetto was gradually decreased, and as of February 1942, it became an enclosed ghetto. In addition to the overcrowding (10 to 15 people to a room), there were shortages of food, clothing, and fuel for heating. Disease broke out and the death rate climbed. During the severe winter of 1941-1942, the Jews had to turn in their fur garments, including the fur hats worn by pious Jews. Some burned their furs to keep them out of German hands. Anyone caught disobeying the order was shot, as was the case with at least one family. 
During 1942, the situation in the ghetto deteriorated considerably and the Judenrat eventually became less cooperative with the German authorities. On January 3, 1942, the Security Police shot about 20 Jews on the streets, allegedly to prevent the spread of typhus. On April 25, 1942, the Germans shot another 70 Jews, who were members of Zionist organizations. In the spring of 1942, Jews expelled from villages in the surrounding area started to arrive in Gorlice. Rumors of the impending liquidation of the ghetto began to spread. The Judenrat initiated a program to train people as tailors. By June, about 350 people were employed making clothes. A workshop for youngsters aged 13 to 20 enabled 100 of them to become employed making toys and house slippers.
On July 22, 1942, the German authorities ordered all men to assemble on the town square. Several hundred Jews were selected and were sent to labor camps at Płaszów, Pustków, Frysztak, or to the aviation factory in Mielec. At about this time the Germans demanded a “contribution” from the Jews. When people did not deliver the required amount, Germans broke into their dwellings and took money and valuables by force. At the beginning of August, Jews from Bobowa and Biecz were brought back into the ghetto.
In mid-August 1942, the Germans organized a major Aktion against the ghetto. First, the German authorities demanded another large contribution of 250,000 złoty. Then during the night of August 13-14 (or according to some sources on August 16-17), the Germans, assisted by Ukrainian and other auxiliaries surrounded the ghetto and all Jews were again ordered to report to the town square. 
Many hid in attics and cellars. The German-led forces combed the area and anyone discovered in hiding was shot on the spot. Two hundred Jews were selected from the square and sent to the Płaszów camp. Perhaps several hundred Jews – the elderly, the sick, and the children – together with a similar group from the Bobowa ghetto – were taken by truck to the Garbacz Forest in Stróżowka, forced to undress, lined up next to open pits, and murdered. The members of the Judenrat, the Jewish Police, and their families were shot next to Gestapo headquarters. The “essential” workers at Hobag and the tarpaper factory were excluded from the roundup. The rest were taken to sheds on the grounds of a shoe factory near the train station. Here they were held without food or water for three days and then put onto 60 freight cars destined for the Bełżec extermination camp. In total about 2,500 Jews perished in this Aktion. 
About 700 Jews were left in the enclosed ghetto. These included the roughly 100 “essential” workers, others who were assigned to clean up the ghetto, and some agricultural workers. Also among them were some “illegals,” people who had hidden during the roundup. About 50 were caught and sent to the Garbacz Forest to bury the corpses. They never returned. Another selection took place at which 250 people were ordered to step forward. Anyone who refused was shot. The rest were shipped to Bełżec. On September 14, the ghetto was finally liquidated, when a few hundred more Jews were put on the train to Bełżec. Only the 70 working for Hobag and the 30 at the tarpaper factory remained. They were locked up on the grounds of these factories. On January 6, 1943, the 70 Hobag workers were sent to the labor camp at Muszyna and the 30 from the tarpaper factory to the camp at Rzeszów. 
In August 1968 the regional court in Nürnberg-Fürth sentenced two former officials of the GPK in Gorlice, Otto Friedrich and Paul Baron, to life imprisonment for shooting Jews in Gorlice on a number of separate occasions in 1942 and 1943. 
Sources:
Publications on the Jewish community of Gorlice and its fate during the Holocaust include the following: M.Y. Bar-On, ed., Sefer Gorlice; Hakehillah bivinyanah uvihurbanah (Tel Aviv: Association of Former Residents of Gorlice and Its Vicinity in Israel, 1962); Władysław Boczoń, Żydzi Gorliccy (Gorlice: W. Boczoń, 1998); and Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 93-97. Extracts from a survivor testimony taken by the Fortunoff Video Archive can be found in Joshua M. Greene and Shiva Kumar, Witness: Voices from the Holocaust (New York: Free Press, 2000).
Documents on the persecution and annihilation of the Jews of Gorlice can be found in the following Archives: AŻIH (301/1113); BA-L; FVA (# 61); IPN; ITS (R 50/Z 34); USHMM (RG-15.019M, reel 10); VHF: and YVA.
Samuel Fishman, Martin Dean, and Jolanta Kraemer
Grybów
Pre-1939; Grybów, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Grünberg, Kreis Neu-Sandez, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Grybów, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Grybów is located 94 kilometers (59 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. In 1921, the Jewish population was 847 out of a total population of 2,931. 
In September 1939, before the arrival of the Germans, many Jews fled to the east into what soon became the Soviet-occupied zone. Some remained there, while others returned to Grybów, once the fighting had ceased. A week after the outbreak of war, German forces arrived in Grybów and immediately began to kidnap Jews for forced labor. Most were put to work repairing roads and bridges damaged in the fighting. The German authorities imposed a series of anti-Jewish measures, including the levying of “contributions,” limitations on the movement of Jews, and the requirement to wear identifying markings.
At the end of October 1939, the town became part of Kreis Neu-Sandez (Nowy Sącz), administered by Kreishauptmann Dr. Reinhard Busch. The German authorities ordered the establishment of a Jewish council (Judenrat). One of its main tasks was organizing the daily quota of Jewish forced laborers. In the first months of 1940, a Jewish auxiliary police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was formed. As the economic plight of the community worsened, the Judenrat extended material assistance to those in need. The local branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) opened a public kitchen. By the fall of 1940, there were 1,320 Jews in Grybów (including 191 refugees). More than 500 Jews were receiving assistance from the JSS. 
In the fall of 1940 and the first half of 1941, the German authorities ordered that Jews living in the villages and smaller towns in Kreis Neu-Sandez must move to the larger towns of Nowy Sącz, Stary Sącz, Mszana Dolna, Limanowa, and Grybów. As a result, a number of refugees arrived in Grybów from Łabowa, Tylicz, Librantowa, Muszyna, Krynica, and other places, almost all in need of support.  The local branch of the JSS sent an urgent plea to the central office of the JSS in Kraków for assistance in absorbing these additional refugees.
At the end of 1941, there was an increase in the number of people being kidnapped and sent to forced labor camps. In March 1942, the JSS sought to establish a workshop and develop a training program for young people, in the hope that this might provide some protection from the roundups for the labor camps.
At the beginning of 1942, the Germans banned the Jews from streets occupied by non-Jews and forced them to live in a few narrow streets of their own scattered throughout the town, establishing a form of open ghetto. The Jews had to build paths and steps in order to get from one street to the other without encroaching on non-Jewish boundaries. 
At the time of the formation of the open ghetto in early 1942, a Polish woman, Sukonava, was caught selling milk to a Jewish woman. As a punishment, the Polish Police forced Sukonava to dance with a Jew in the marketplace on Sunday afternoon, as the Christians were returning home from church. As a result most Poles became too scared to trade with the Jews and the shortages of food in the ghetto worsened considerably.  At this time the public kitchen increased its assistance to the needy and the Judenrat opened a clinic to try to prevent outbreaks of disease.
In April 1942, the head of the Gestapo in Nowy Sącz, SS-Obersturmführer Heinrich Hamann, received instructions from the Commanding Officer of the Security Police (KdS) in Kraków to arrest and shoot all Jews in the Kreis known to be communists or to sympathize with them. In response Hamann obtained an old membership list for the Poalei Zion (left-wing Zionist) movement and ordered that all those on the list be arrested with the assistance of the Jewish councils and Jewish Police. When it was reported that the Jewish Police in Grybów had been able to arrest only about 20 people from a much longer list, Hamann traveled in person to Grybów on the morning of April 28. On his arrival he confronted the head of the Judenrat, Samuel Neugroschel, and ordered that he be shot together with four other members of the Judenrat and five members of the Jewish Police. The 20 or so Jews arrested in Grybów were sent to the prison in Nowy Sącz, and were shot along with other Jews at the Jewish cemetery in Nowy Sącz shortly afterwards. 
At the beginning of August 1942, the German authorities demanded another large contribution from the Judenrat in Grybów.  The Gestapo office in Nowy Sącz planned the “resettlement” of the Jews from Grybów on August 16, 1942. Just prior to this date, the Germans ordered Poles in the Construction Service (Baudienst) to dig a large ditch behind the wooded hill in Biala Nizna close to the Dominican monastery about 1.6 kilometers (1 mile) to the northeast of Grybów. At 6:00 A.M., on the morning of August 16, the Jews were assembled on the market square with the assistance of the Jewish Police. On the basis of a list prepared by the Judenrat, Hamann checked that all the Jews were present and then participated in the selection of about 300 sick and disabled Jews, who were sent to one side. Another group of 34 Jews employed at the Hobag-Werke in Grybów were given special passes and sent off to their work site. 
After placing their house keys into baskets as ordered, the remaining 1,200 or so Jews capable of walking were escorted by the Jewish Police 21 kilometers (13 miles) in the heat of the sun to the enclosed ghetto on Kazimierza Street in Nowy Sącz. Those selected as unfit were loaded onto five trucks and taken to the killing site at Biala Nizna, which was cordoned off by men of the Gendarmerie. The Jews were made to undress and members of the Gestapo under Hamann’s supervision shot them in groups of five using machine pistols, as they lay face down in the mass grave.   Some Poles observed the gruesome scene at the site of the mass shooting while sitting on their rooftops. 
At the end of August 1942, the occupiers deported most of the Jews in the Nowy Sącz ghettos to the Bełżec extermination camp. Some of those from Grybów who were capable of work were sent to various labor camps, including those in Rytro, Rożnów, and Sędziszów. 
Only very few Jews from Grybów and its vicinity managed to survive the German occupation, either in various camps or by hiding on the “Aryan” side.
Sources:
The yizkor books for Nowy Sącz: Shlomo Zalman Lehrer and Leizer Strassman, The Vanished City of Tsanz, (Southfield, MI: Targum, 1997) and Rafael Mahler, ed., Seyfer Sants (Tel Aviv: Sandzer landsmanshaftn in New York, 1970), both contain some information in relation to Grybów. Other relevant published sources include: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 100-103; and Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 1979-), vol. 24, Lfd. Nr. 635, pp. 269-484 (LG-Bo 16 Ks 1/65, verdict against Heinrich Hamann and others).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Grybów can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1338, 1703; 211/437-440); IPN (ASG, sygn. 10, k. 428); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 24); and YVA.
Martin Dean
Jasienica Rosielna 
Pre-1939: Jasienica Rosielna, village, Lwów województwo; 1939-1944: initially Kreis Sanok, then (from November 1941) Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Jasienica Rosielna is located 62 kilometers (39 miles) west-southwest of Przemyśl. Approximately 500 Jews were living there in 1939.
German forces occupied Jasienica Rosielna around September 10, 1939. There is no information regarding the first months of the occupation, other than that a small number of Jews from Krosno were resettled there, either in late 1939 or in 1940.  
The German authorities set up a Jewish council (Judenrat), which in the spring of 1940 included Osias Majerowicz as the chairman, Dawid Sicherman, Majer Balser, and Leib Sindel. By December 1940, Dawid Sicherman had taken over the Judenrat’s leadership.  The date when the Jewish Police (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was organized is unknown; however, it included Natan Balcer and Izrael Beer Weitz. 
In May 1940, there were 386 Jews living in Jasienica, including 46 refugees, mostly from Kraków and Upper Silesia. The Jasienica Judenrat, however, also administered a much larger Jewish population in the so-called “Domaradz Collective Community” that included nearby villages in which 750 Jews lived. The largest of the settlements was Domaradz, located 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) from Jasienica and boasting a population of more than 100 Jews. By the end of 1940, the number of Jews in Jasienica itself had risen to 430 (88 families).  
By the spring of 1940, most of Jasienica’s Jews had already been deprived of their means of income and were left to support themselves by selling their furniture and clothing. In the autumn of 1940, a number of men were employed in road construction, earning 3 złoty per day, yet part of these meager wages was deducted in order to support those unable to work. Many were conscripted daily for forced labor in and around Jasienica. Not a single Jewish-owned shop remained open. 
As the authorities considered Jasienica a village – not a town – its Jews were not eligible for ration cards. Welfare organizations did not provide assistance, because the community could not afford to open a soup kitchen, and this was a prerequisite for the provision of financial support. A soup kitchen was in fact opened briefly; but according to the Judenrat, its maintenance did not make much sense, as it was too difficult for the widely dispersed needy Jews to walk every day all the way to Jasienica for a single meal. The Judenrat’s position was that the community would benefit more from the distribution of groceries instead.
With time, the Judenrat’s correspondence with the main welfare institutions the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) and the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization reveals its increasing frustration, due to the continued denial of assistance. The severity of the situation may have led the JSS headquarters in Kraków to establish a branch in the smaller village of Domaradz at the beginning of 1942, despite its never having established a kitchen. The branch, chaired by Izydor Nattel, supervised the organization of welfare in six settlements, including Jasienica, where the soup kitchen was reopened in January 1942. Willi Halpern was the kitchen’s manager.  
In March 1942, a number of Jasienica Jews worked in a labor camp in Bzianka (near Strzyżów). The Judenrat provided money for their sustenance. 
On June 24, 1942, 550 Jews from the area north of Brzozów were resettled to Jasienica. Among others, the resettlement included Jews from Domaradz, Hłudno, Barycz, Golcowa, Gwoźnica, Blizne, Przysietnica, Wesoła, Wola Jasienicka, and Orzechówka (mostly in the Domaradz and Nozdrzec Landgemeinden). This meant that approximately 250 of the newcomers were brought in from settlements that were not included in the original Collective Community. The number of Jews in Jasienica rose to approximately 1,000 or 1,100.
The Gestapo and the Polish auxiliary police usually conducted the resettlements to Jasienica. The Jews were usually given only minutes to pack, so many of them arrived with few or no belongings. 
The ghetto in Jasienica Rosielna was set up on June 27, 1942.  In many cases, about 15 people shared a room, and some had to sleep in the streets. People slept both night and day, in shifts, or in sitting positions.  
The JSS branch was transferred from Domaradz to Jasienica on the establishment of the ghetto and included Izydor Nattel (chairman), Mechel Scherer, and Abraham Willner. With financial help from Krosno for the resettled, the soup kitchen continued serving meals, while children and the sick were getting some milk. Krosno also provided Jasienica’s ghetto with some medicine and sent a Jewish doctor to examine the poor free of charge. A Sanitation Committee was established. The public bath was open every other day. Jasienica’s Jews were also vaccinated for typhus. 
Immediately following the ghetto’s establishment, on either June 29 or 30, 1942, able-bodied men had to register. Soon small groups of Jews went to Jaśliska, Dynów, Bachórz, and Wola Wyżna. In Jasienica itself, approximately 60 men labored in fieldworks at a nearby manor, road works, and a quarry. 
The hardest labor was in Jaśliska, where laborers walked 28 kilometers (17.4 miles) each day to cut beech trees in a forest. A survivor recalls running 8 kilometers (5 miles) mostly uphill. Although workers were treated humanely, the daily quota set by the company management was impossible to fulfill. Divided into teams of three, the workers were to gather 5 cubic meters (6.5 cubic yards) of wood daily. Within the two weeks they spent in Jaśliska, the laborers received so little food that the Jasienica JSS had to furnish them with rations, clothing, and blankets. Laborers in Bachórz worked 12 to 13 hours daily. Laborers suffered from hunger in each of the camps. A number were released early due to malnourishment. 
At the end of July 1942, the Brzozów authorities – “in principle” – agreed to open workshops in the Jasienica ghetto. Tentative orders were placed, but were to be fulfilled using their own materials. The Arbeitsamt registered 140 women who were then engaged in the small-scale production of straw goods. 
In early August, the ghetto was effectively closed, as the JSS chairman Nattel reported increased restrictions on movement: “The delivery or purchase of any food [outside of the ghetto] was precluded entirely.” 
The liquidation of the Jasienica Rosielna ghetto was conducted on August 12, 1942. That morning, Gestapo men and Ukrainian auxiliary police from Krosno surrounded the ghetto. Seven Jews were reportedly killed while the community was being chased out of their homes. Young girls and teenagers were taken on trucks to the Iwonicz train station; there are no sources reporting their fate. Six hundred and forty-five women, children, and elderly were shot in the Jewish cemetery. The execution lasted from 10:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M. with only a one-hour break. The victims were buried in a mass grave. 
Sources:
Brief information on the Jasienica Rosielna ghetto can be found in the following publications: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 65-66; and Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), p. 107 (Domaradz) and pp. 220-221 (Jasienica Rosielna).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Jasienica Rosielna can be found in the following archives: AŻIH, (210/375 (AJDC Jasienica Rosielna); 211/466 (JSS Jasienica Rosielna); 301/2045 and 301/4536 (Relacje)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS Jasienica Rosielna), reel 25 and (JSS Korespondencja z Jakubem Sternbergiem), reel 10, 211/154-156; and RG-15.084M (Relacje), # 2045 and 4536); VHF (# 3503); and YVA.
Jolanta Kraemer
Jasło
Pre-1939: Jasło, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Jaslo, center of Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Jasło, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Jasło is located about 94 kilometers (59 miles) west of Przemyśl. In 1939, on the eve of World War II, around 3,000 Jews were living there, among a total population of some 10,000 people. At the end of 1939 and in 1940, some 3,000 Jews were resettled into Kreis Jaslo from western Poland, which increased the town’s Jewish population considerably. 
On September 8, 1939, German armed forces occupied the town. At the end of October, Jasło was incorporated into Distrikt Krakau within the Generalgouvernement. Jasło became the administrative center of Kreis Jaslo. Regierungsrat Dr. Ludwig Losacker was the first Kreishauptmann, from the end of 1939; Regierungsrat Dr. Walter Gentz succeeded him in this post on February 10, 1941. 
Alongside the office of the Kreishauptmann, the Germans established in Jasło a German Gendarmerie force, a Polish (Blue) Police force and a Border Police office (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, GPK), which was commanded from 1940 to 1943 by SS-Hauptsturmführer Dr. Wilhelm Raschwitz. The GPK (comprised of Security Police) organized and carried out the Aktions against the Jews in Jasło and the surrounding areas.
On September 22, 1939, on the orders of the occupying forces, Polish fire fighters burned down the synagogue. The Germans also demanded 40,000 złoty as a “contribution” from the Jews and took 150 notable Jews hostage in the prison as leverage. After this sum was paid in full, they released the hostages on September 25.  From the start of the occupation, German soldiers and officials robbed Jewish shops and houses with impunity. Jews were also compelled to perform forced labor. At the end of October 1939, the German authorities ordered all Jews to wear white armbands bearing a blue Star of David and established a Jewish council (Judenrat). The Jewish council in Jasło served from April 29, 1940 as a central council of Jewish elders coordinating the operations of the 16 Jewish councils operating in Kreis Jaslo. 
Jakub Herzig has described how the president of Jasło’s Judenrat and some of its members lived well while most Jews went hungry. According to Herzig, a minority of the Judenrat acted decently, but they lacked power.  Despite this criticism of some corruption and favoritism, the Jewish council did undertake several measures to alleviate the suffering of the Jews, including the many refugees in Jasło. It organized a soup kitchen, an orphanage, a hospital, and also in December 1940 a school for 300 children. 
Sometime during 1941, probably before May,  Dr. Gentz ordered the Judenrat to establish a Jewish quarter (jüdisches Wohnbezirk) or open ghetto in a few of the poorest streets of the town, around the old market place, Targowica. Here, the Jews were crammed together in overcrowded houses under terrible conditions. Until the end of 1941, Jews could leave the area each day to buy goods from the local Poles. But, on December 20, 1941, the ghetto was transformed into a closed area, surrounded on all sides by walls or a fence with only one exit that was closely guarded. Thereafter, Jews could not leave the ghetto without a special permit issued by the German authorities; signs placed around the ghetto warned violators that the punishment was death. 
At the end of December 1941, all Jews in the ghetto were ordered to hand over their fur coats and other fur articles of clothing. Refusal to comply was also punishable by death. The food rations issued to the Jews were totally inadequate, containing only a minimal amount of low-grade meat, a little bread and jam, but no fat or milk. Hunger and malnutrition accompanied by other diseases caused the Jews to become desperate. Some were compelled to sneak out of the ghetto in search of food, despite the great risks involved. 
At the time of the “fur Aktion” (Pelzaktion), in the winter of 1941-1942, a number of Jews were shot by members of the GPK, allegedly for withholding fur items. Other Jews were shot for leaving the ghetto without permission. In February 1942, the GPK shot about 50 Jews, who had been allowed to return from Eastern Galicia to Jasło in the fall of 1941. Shortly after this, Dr. Maria Zucker, a Jewish physician who had been permitted to live outside the ghetto on account of her treatment of wounded German soldiers, was arrested on the orders of the mayor. Her husband was among those who had returned from Eastern Galicia. She was denounced for alleged defeatist remarks about the Germans, who executed her at the Jewish cemetery.  In the spring of 1942, about 200 Jews were sent to the nearby town of Frysztak to perform forced labor. The GPK subsequently arrested the families of these Jews in Jasło in July 1942 and shot them in the forest. 
In the summer of 1942, the German authorities began to liquidate the ghetto in Kreis Jaslo. On August 18, 1942, Dr. Gentz ordered the Judenrat to assemble the Jews on the Targowica market place. At this time, German, Ukrainian, and Polish Police had already surrounded the ghetto. As these forces searched the empty ghetto, any Jews that were uncovered were either shot on the spot or escorted to the market place. At the Targowica, the Jews were searched for any valuables. A selection was conducted and about 200 Jews capable of work were sent to one side in order to assist with cleaning out the ghetto. Those unfit for travel were then loaded onto trucks and taken to the forest of Warzyce to be shot. As the deportation trains had not arrived in time, the remaining 2,000 to 3,000 Jews were escorted up the hill to the monastery of “Wizytki,” part of which had been converted into a barracks. One or two days later, these Jews were escorted to the railway station and loaded onto trains destined for the extermination camp in Bełżec together with other Jews from the nearby towns of Frysztak and Nowy Żmigród. 
By 1943, only about 100 people were left in the remnant ghetto; they were then sent to a labor camp for Jews in Szebnie.  Some Jews, such as Jakub Herzig went into hiding or attempted to live on the Aryan side. They had to fear blackmailers or other people who might denounce them and they could not survive without the assistance of non-Jews. Several people from Jasło have been recognized as Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem for their assistance to Jews, including Helena Kosiba, who helped Jakub Herzig by regularly supplying him with food and helping him to leave Jasło once he had acquired false identification cards. 
As the Germans prepared for their retreat at the end of 1944, they began to destroy the town systematically. Very little of the town remained when the Red Army captured Jasło in January 1945.
On December 5, 1972, the local court in Arnsberg, Germany passed sentence on three former members of the GPK in Jasło, who in 1942-1943 had participated in the persecution and murder of Jews in the town. One of the accused was found not guilty, Walter Augustin received a sentence of two years and his other co-defendant was sentenced to five-and-a-half years in prison.
Sources:
Information on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish population of Jasło can be found in the following publications: M.N. Even-Hayim, Toldot yehudei Jaslo; me-reshit hityashvutam be-tokh ha-ir ad yemei ha-hurban al yedei ha-natzim... (Tel Aviv: Jaslo Society, 1953); Jakub O. Herzig, Jaslo (Montreal, 1954); Jakub O. Herzig, My Wanderings in the War (Montreal, 1955); Jasło oskarża (Warsaw, 1973); M. Wieliczko, Jasielskie w latach drugiej wojny światowej (Warsaw, 1974); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 207-213; and Jakub O. Herzig, “Jaslo: The Birth and Death of a Jewish Community in Poland from its Beginnings to the Holocaust,” translated by Rabbi Leila Berner and published by Adam & Jack Herzig (www.shtetlinks.jewishgen.org).
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH; BA-L (ZStL, II 206 AR-Z 827/63 (B 162/14484)); IPN (ASG, sygn. 58, k. 51); USHMM (RG-15.073M, reel 1, 222/1, financial register of the Jewish council in Jasło, 1941-1942 and Acc. 1995.A.770); VHF; and YVA.
Alexander Kruglov and Martin Dean
trans. Steven Seegel
Jawornik Polski
Pre-1939: Jawornik Polski, village, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo; 1939-1945: Jawornik, Kreis Reichshof, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Jawornik Polski, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Jawornik Polski is located 35 kilometers (22 miles) southeast of Rzeszów. There were 328 Jews living in Jawornik and its vicinity on the eve of World War II. Several neighboring settlements had an average population of a few dozen Jews. 
The Wehrmacht entered Jawornik on September 10, 1939. Wehrmacht forces were permanently stationed in Jawornik due to the presence of Red Army forces just across the San River, following the Soviet invasion of eastern Poland. Wehrmacht officers occupied the town hall, while soldiers were quartered in a barracks built next to it, as well as in private homes. 
By the end of 1939, the new authorities had appointed a Jewish council (Judenrat) with Jakób Schneid as its president and Marcus Beck as his deputy. 
By the end of the summer of 1940, the Reichshof Kreishauptmann had ordered 40 deportees from other parts of Poland to be resettled from Rzeszów to Jawornik. In December 1940, the Jewish community of Jawornik and its vicinity consisted of 350 Jews. This number remained more or less constant, increasing only by another 50 in May 1941. Some of the newcomers were housed outside of Jawornik with the better-off Jewish peasants, mostly comprising holders of small plots in neighboring settlements. Newcomer families were rotated between different households so as to distribute the burden of their care more evenly. A Jewish committee for social aid was set up upon the deportees’ arrival. In January 1941, its members were: Judenrat Deputy Markus Beck, Bernard Mohl, Chaim Teitelbaum, Israel Turner, and L. Magiet. 
The committee’s aid proved to be inadequate; e.g., its expenses for May 1941 show that out of its 137 złoty budget, 90 złoty went toward the salaries of the committee’s three paid employees; 12 złoty was spent on office maintenance, and 10 złoty on office supplies. The remaining 25 złoty is registered as “other expenses.” If it were spent on the refugees’ needs, it would provide each of them with only 0.50 złoty of aid per person, which at the time could buy only a single meal.
The same month, a branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), headquartered in Kraków, was established in Jawornik Polski. A committee including the Judenrat’s president Schneid as the chairman, Israel Turner, and Chaim Bessen, governed it. The JSS staff was unpaid and was helped by 10 volunteers. The committee never opened a soup kitchen. A little cash, clothing, and groceries (mostly potatoes, flour, and kasha) were dispensed whenever aid was sent by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) or the JSS. 
Apart from this activity, the Jawornik JSS refused even to attempt to organize any kind of help themselves, not only because of lack of funds, but also because its staff was unpaid. In August 1941, when spurred by Kraków to set up a soup kitchen for children, the JSS committee replied that there were “not enough children” in Jawornik. As the community had no access to medical assistance, Kraków offered to send a doctor to visit Jawornik, to which chairman Schneid replied: “everyone is in the best of health, so those doctors do not have to visit us.” In March 1942, the chairman again reported no disease among Jawornik’s Jews. 
By May 1941, only one Jewish-owned shop remained open; and none of the craftsmen were operating their businesses. Between March 1940 and July 1941, 40 Jews labored permanently either in Jawornik itself or within the gmina’s borders. Out of a total of 355 registered members of the Jawornik community, 310 were “without occupation” during this time. Between August and November 1941, only 12 to 13 Jews were laboring. Occasionally, the Germans would request much larger numbers of workers. There is no information as to the nature of their work or its compensation. However, the JSS did not bear any of their labor costs, nor did it provide sustenance for the laborers, as was common in other Jewish communities. 
From December 17, 1941, Kreishauptmann Dr. Heinz Ehaus ordered the establishment of Jewish quarters in Kreis Reichshof, setting dates for them to be closed. In Rzeszów, the closing order was effective on January 10, 1942; whereas for the remainder of the Kreis, it was February 1, 1942. Soon after the latter date, Jawornik, or at least that part populated by Jews, was recognized as a ghetto and the inhabitants were forbidden to leave on pain of death.
By April 1942, land belonging to Jewish peasants in the vicinity had been expropriated. The JSS in Kraków instructed its Jawornik branch to research whether the Jews could be employed in agriculture, but by April 25, 1942, the Kreishauptmann in Rzeszów had ordered all Jews living in the vicinity – approximately 200 people – to resettle within Jawornik’s town limits. The number of Jews in the ghetto, however, did not change as these peasants had been included previously in JSS statistics. As the Judenrat’s chairman Schneid put it, the peasants “arrived in such a condition that they were unable to afford even a single breakfast.”
Just days later on April 30, 1942, a registration of Jewish men aged 12 to 60 was conducted. A transport of an unspecified number of laborers left Jawornik on May 4, 1942, for the Biesiadka labor camp near Mielec. The Jawornik JSS made an effort to send weekly food packages to the camp. 
In Biesiadka, Jews and Poles, separated from each other, were conscripted to cut beech trees for the German Fischer company and assist the Müller company to transport them to Mielec by truck. Jewish laborers were treated as prisoners and worked under the supervision of guards. Kolis, the commander of the Jewish camp in Biesiadka, often shot individual laborers. Laborers received a modest meal before and after work. 
Upon the men’s departure from Jawornik, a registration of young women was also conducted and a number of them were tasked with beautyfying the village. The few able-bodied men who remained in Jawornik worked on road construction.  
The last correspondence concerning the Jawornik JSS is dated May 23, 1942. The ghetto’s liquidation took place in late June 1942. A brief description can be found in the Ringelblum Archives, as well as in the Polish Court Inquiry about Executions and Mass Graves of October 1945, although neither document uses the term “ghetto.” The Ringelblum Archive states that, while collecting the Jews on the market square by chasing them out of their houses, nine Jews were murdered. They were shot by the SS and police at the following locations: on the river bank, in the field, and on and around the market square. Apart from Chaja and Malcia Spiegel who were both 20 years old, the other victims were 48 to 90 years old. Jewish residents  buried the victims in separate graves in the Jewish cemetery. The remaining Jews, including the Judenrat, were sent to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
The Jawornik Judenrat is mentioned in another record in the Ringelblum Archives, which refers to overdue taxes that all inhabitants of the Rzeszów ghetto were due to pay by June 26, 1942 (in accordance with a June 19, 1942 order by Kreishauptmann Ehaus). In the evening of June 26, 15 Judenrat members (5 from Rzeszów and 10 from various liquidated ghettos whose residents had just been brought to Rzeszów, including Jawornik), were shot, allegedly for not having paid these overdue taxes. 
In July 1942, the Jews of Jawornik, along with other Jews concentrated in the Rzeszów ghetto, were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.  
Six Jews who were discovered in an empty house in Jawornik were reportedly shot in August 1942 by SS and police forces for “hiding from the ghetto.” All of them, including the four-person family of the tradesman Mozes Springer and his son’s fiancée, were buried at the Jewish cemetery in a mass grave.  On September 13, 1942, German Gendarmes shot five or six Jews in the Wola Rafałowska settlement. The Polish woman, Rozalia Socha who had given them shelter was executed in punishment next to her house two months later. On September 16, 1942, the Gestapo shot three Jewish men and also a Pole, Wojciech Patroński, for hiding them. All were murdered in the Buczyna Forest in the settlement of Szklary. In November 1942, the Germans discovered a bunker occupied by Jews hiding in the forest of Handle Szklarskie. A captured Jewish woman reportedly gave away the names of nine Poles who had helped the fugitives. In all, nine Poles and seven Jews were shot.  
Sources:
Brief descriptions and references can be found in the following publications: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 71-72; and Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 206-207; Stanisław Poradowski, “Zagłada Żydów rzeszowskich,” Parts 3 and 4, BŻIH (1987-1988).
Relevant archival information can be found in: AŻIH (Ring I/472; 211/475 (JSS); and 210/380 (AJDC)); IPN (ASG); USHMM (RG-15.019M (ASG); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); and RG-15.079M (Ring I/472, also as ARG I/1/35, DVD 2)).
Jolanta Kraemer
Jedlicze 
Pre-1939: Jedlicze, village, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: initially Kreis Jaslo, from November 1941, Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Jedlicze is located about 140 kilometers (87.5 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. In 1921, there were 232 Jews living in Jedlicze.
Following the German occupation of the village in September 1939, Jews were forced to clean the Wehrmacht’s stables and quarters; the latter situated in a local school. They were “paid a few cents” for their work. According to survivor Bernice Feit, during Rosh Ha-Shanah in 1939, the Gestapo raided the village, conducting strip-searches of women as they searched for hidden valuables. It was on this occasion that the Germans burned all the books in the synagogue. 
Other survivors, however, emphasize that the occupation of Jedlicze was largely peaceful. Henry Adler stated that thanks to his cousin’s familiarity with the Gestapo men who oversaw Jedlicze, through “business transactions and bribery… [it was possible to ensure that] nobody touched the town.” Jewish stores were closed. Regular searches of Jewish houses were conducted, but in most instances, the occupants remained unharmed.  
A Judenrat chaired by Izrael Lambik was set up at the beginning of 1940; Szymon Friss, a refugee from Katowice, replaced him in the summer of 1942.
By May 1940, there were 300 Jews (75 families) in Jedlicze, including 27 refugees from Germany and Upper Silesia. 
More refugees arrived from Kraków in the summer of 1940. By mid-September of that year, they were the largest group of newcomers, totaling 65 persons. Lambik described the group as follows: “Nearly all of them are in need of relief, because the rich would not come to such a small place.” By February 1941, there was a total of 385 Jews in Jedlicze. In April 1941, the Judenrat reported to Kraków, “that due to the deportations from Jasło, we are experiencing a great population influx, such that we cannot cope.” 
The date, on which Jedlicze’s ghetto was established, is not known. Unfenced, it remained open to the extent that its inhabitants did not feel restrained. Survivor Menasche Wolf describes the situation in 1941 as follows, “We lived in the same houses. There were no restrictions so to speak […] like ghettos, but we were confined to our houses. […] They managed without doing anything, still to keep you in the house [such that you did] not go too far.” A Jewish police force was organized. 
A children’s day care service was opened on August 1, 1940. The Gazeta Żydowska reported that in the summer of 1941, two teachers were instructing all 60 children “in accordance with the program of the public school in Jasło,” as well as providing limited food rations. 
Throughout the town’s occupation, up to 50 men aged 16 to 50 regularly had to perform forced labor. Many labored in an oil refinery on the outskirts of Jedlicze. Others walked daily 10 kilometers (6 miles) to Krosno to build the Sanok-Jasło road or dig ditches for electricity and water pipes at a military airfield in Krosno. A column of laborers would leave at 5:00 A.M. every day, only to return in the evening. After the Germans constructed barracks at the airfield sometime in 1941, laborers remained there permanently and consequently were not allowed even to visit Jedlicze. In August 1941, 20 men were reported as laboring outside of the gmina. 
In July 1941, a branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was set up in Jedlicze with the Judenrat chairman Izrael Lambik as president. It also included Józef Reiss (deputy) and Samuel Felber. Shortly thereafter, the JSS opened a soup kitchen; however it was repeatedly closed due to insufficient funds. The JSS branch itself was closed in September 1941. Its members continued to work unofficially, but with little efficacy. In August 1941, there were 485 Jews living in Jedlicze. 
The Kreishauptmann ordered the concentration of the rural Jews of the Kreis in towns and ghettos by June 24, 1942. According to the Krosno JSS, 120 Jews from the Chorkówka collective gmina were given only one hour on this day to pack their belongings for resettlement to the Jedlicze ghetto. Survivor Stephen Feld recalls, however, that residents of other settlements were notified by the Judenrat’s chairman, who went around informing all Jewish inhabitants that they had three days to transfer to Jedlicze. The newcomers were placed with the town’s Jewish families and in the synagogue. 
The last information on the number of ghetto residents is from the July 1, 1942 issue of Gazeta Żydowska, reporting a population of 512 Jews, including 210 deportees to Jedlicze. One week later, the same source reported that a total of 170 Jews had been resettled to Jedlicze. At this time, 35 children were being taught Hebrew, Judaism, arithmetic, and bookkeeping. 
Using the false pretext of labor registration, the Germans rounded up Jedlicze’s Jewish population and liquidated the ghetto – most likely – in the first half of August 1942. In the night preceding the liquidation, German and Ukrainian forces surrounded the village. The following morning, the Jewish Police helped to gather ghetto residents on the market square. Each person was allowed to take up to 10 kilograms (22 pounds) of luggage. Old people were then rounded up to be shot. Women, children, and those who could not present an Arbeitskarte (work card), were held at the market, and then loaded onto wagons and taken to the Krosno ghetto. 
Among the 80 people who were spared from deportation to work in the oil refinery were the new Judenrat chairman Friss and his wife. After another selection was conducted later that day, only 40 men and three women with children remained. They were given two large houses in which to live. Only those Jews working in the refinery could stay there; however several escapees hid in the attic. After a surprise search by the Gestapo, refinery laborers “got scared because they endangered them.” In December 1942, the remaining laborers were informed by the Germans that they would be evicted and placed in another home; in fact all were deported to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
Sources:
Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich i Muzeum Regionalne PTTK im. Adama Fastnachta w Brzozowie, 1993), p. 35, states that all but 40 Jews were deported on July 7, 1941 to the Jasło ghetto. None of the sources used in this entry confirm such an early date for the transfer of the community.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (210/381 (AJDC), 211/477, 211/615 (JSS), 301/1373 (Relacje)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS)); and VHF (# 7037, 24020, 25078, 34731, 34789).
Jolanta Kraemer
Jodłowa
Pre-1939: Jodłowa, village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Jodlowa, Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Jodłowa, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Jodłowa is located 29 kilometers (18 miles) southeast of Tarnów. There were 301 Jews living in Jodłowa in 1921.
After the German occupation, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in Jodłowa at the beginning of 1940. Salamon Kanarek served as its chairman and Abraham Pariser as his deputy. In November 1940, there were 30 refugees from Kraków and Łódź in the village. By February 1941 the number of refugees had risen to 50. They were housed with local Jews, one-to-two persons per family. The total number of Jewish families in Jodłowa stood at 72. A self-help committee that the Jasło Judenrat had ordered to be established in Jodłowa was at this time “closed.” 
According to survivor Jack Pariser, no Germans were permanently stationed in the village and a unit of Polish (Blue) Police maintained order. The community was usually aware of German visits, as the Jews had to provide laborers or money. During one of the first raids, Jodłowa’s Jews were forced to remove the Torah from the synagogue and walk on it. Jewish businesses were confiscated, but a majority of the Jews were engaged in agriculture and were able to keep their land and livestock until the very end. Pariser stated that with the exception of a few punitive Aktions, the Jews lived peacefully in Jodłowa until the summer of 1942. 
Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Kreis Jasło, established that the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941. One of the ghettos created around that time was in Jodłowa. The open ghetto most likely included the village square and remained unguarded and unfenced.
A branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in the village on July 21, 1941. Its three members were: the Judenrat chairman Kanarek, a teacher Manes Guttman (deputy), and Salamon Kohn. Guttman was in charge of childcare. At that time, there were 120 Jewish children aged 1 to 18. Of that number, 50 (aged 6 to 14) were selected for childcare, i.e. additional food, physical education, singing, needlework, and some form of education “to prevent illiteracy.” A Dr. Laja was employed by the Judenrat to attend to the children’s medical needs. In the summer of 1941, a soup kitchen was opened in Jodłowa.  The JSS branch was closed again by September 15, 1941, due to “minimal” activity. 
In September 1941, there were 345 Jews in Jodłowa. The community was vaccinated for typhus at this time. 
As reported by A. Rubin, in February and March 1942, a number of men were selected for labor camps in Mielec and Pustków. Survivor, Jakób Schenker testified that in June 1942, 50 men were sent to the latter. 
According to child survivor Regina Rueck (born 1935), her family and possibly a number of other Jodłowa Jews were deported to the Brzostek ghetto, most likely in 1942. They were allowed to take clothing and bedding, and were quartered in Brzostek’s synagogue. 
Most sources date the ghetto’s liquidation on August 12, 1942.  On August 11, SS troops came to the village and paid a short visit to the Polish (Blue) Police. The Polish Police warned the Jewish community that the Germans planned to shoot all of them on the following day, after reporting to the village square for supposed transfer to a larger ghetto. News spread amongst the families who lived around the square, as well as to those who lived outside of the Jewish quarter. Survivors Schenker and Pariser estimate that over 100 Jews escaped that night; close to 30 survived the war. 
In the course of the liquidation, 21 to 25 Jews were shot at various points in the village en route to the place of execution. Another 160 to 180 people were taken to a forest next to the village of Przeczyca and shot.  Members of the Baudienst (labor battalion for Poles) in Jasło were forced to dig the graves for Jodłowa’s Jews. Two witnesses from among this group (Jan Rączka and Władysław M.) testified that the victims were led in groups of 10 to the grave and forced to undress. Standing by the grave, they were shot one by one in the back of the head. 
Sources:
The following sources include references to the destruction of Jodłowa’s Jewish community: Mieczysław Wieliczko, Jasielskie w latach drugiej wojny światowej (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, 1974), pp. 131, 148, 182-184; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 73-74; Czesław Czubryt-Borkowski, ed., Przewodnik po upamiętnionych miejscach walk i męczeństwa: lata wojny 1939-1945 (Warsaw: Sport i Turystyka, 1980), p. 482; and Arnon Rubin, The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Communities in Poland and their Relics Today: vol. 3, District Krakow (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University Press, 2008), pp. 195-196.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (210/387, 211/472, 211/495, 301/1694, 301/1778, 301/4697, 301/7164); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); RG-15.019M (Court inquiries about executions and mass graves in districts, provinces, camps, and ghettos); RG-50.493*0107); IPN-Rz (OKBZH-Rz, 549); and VHF (# 9514).
Jolanta Kraemer
Kalwaria Zebrzydowska
Pre-1939: Kalwaria Zebrzydowska, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis and Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Kalwaria Zebrzydowska is located about 32 Kilometers (20 miles) southwest of Kraków. There were approximately 700 Jews living in Kalwaria Zebrzydowska on the eve of World War II.  Fleeing the Germans’ advance in September 1939, most of the Jews sought shelter in Mielec and Lwów. Those who returned shortly afterwards, found their homes destroyed and stores robbed.
A Volksdeutsche (ethnic German) and local pharmacy owner named Kunze was appointed as the town’s Kommissar. Soon afterward, Kalwaria’s Jews were forbidden to travel without a permit, even to nearby Kraków, where many of them conducted trade. Then their businesses were taken over by German trustees, while Jews, according to the local Jewish council (Judenrat), were “prohibited to engage in any trade or craft.” Nonetheless, records show that 17 craftsmen were permitted to run their workshops, and also to employ an additional 10Jews.
Either in late 1939 or early 1940, a German Stadtkommissar, Leopold Hotz, who was an elderly war veteran and invalid, replaced Kunze. Despite his hostility to the Jews, Holtz was – as one of the survivors described it – “open to bribery”; “everything had a price.” Due to bribes, the community was allowed to bake matzot and sell it; such payments were likewise mandatory for the reception of food rations, to which the town’s Jewish inhabitants were already entitled. 
Kraków’s Kreishauptmann ordered the creation of a 12-member Judenrat in February 1940. The only two known names are those of the chairman, Baruch Rand, and his deputy, Dr. J. Breit, who most likely joined the Judenrat in 1941. 
The local court’s prison was located at 9 Mickiewicza Street, where it held prisoners from Kalwaria and Skawina for short periods. There were also German policemen, Gendarmes, and Wehrmacht personnel, as well as a Polish (Blue) Police detachment stationed in Kalwaria.
By August 1940, a large number of refugees had arrived in Kalwaria, many from Kraków and Milówka. 
That summer, 70 Jews worked in road construction. On average, a total of 140 Jews labored on roads throughout 1940, 40 of them in Kalwaria itself and the remainder in its vicinity. 
A school for young children opened in 1940, where a Hebrew teacher taught classes both in Hebrew and Polish. 
By March 1941, a clinic supervised by Dr. Breit was constructed on the premises of the Judenrat’s headquarters at 9 Zebrzydowicka Street. Breit also supervised a sanitation committee charged with the improvement of flats and yards. Although tuberculosis was on the rise in the first months of 1942, there were no reports of other contagious diseases in Kalwaria. Severely sick Jews were treated in the hospital of the Banifratrów Monastery in Kalwaria. It was at this time that the Judenrat operated a soup kitchen for the poor and refugees. 
On April 4, 1941, Kraków’s Kreishauptmann Höller announced a list of towns and gminas where Jews were allowed to live; Kalwaria was one of them. The original deadline for resettlement – April 25, 1941 – was delayed until May 18, 1941, and Jewish farmers were excluded.
An unknown number of Jews from Kalwaria’s vicinity responded to the resettlement order and moved to Kalwaria, where they were housed en masse.  The newcomers were mainly residents of the villages of Zebrzydowice and Brody. Upon their arrival, Hotz imposed further restrictions on Jewish residence in Kalwaria. All those Jews living along the main streets with windows overlooking the street had to move to apartments facing backyards or onto side streets.  At the end of May 1941, 1,069 Jews were registered in Kalwaria. 
During the second half of 1941, the town’s Jews were permitted to walk the streets of Kalwaria for only two hours a day. Soon afterwards, a curfew was imposed and all roads were closed to the Jews. In order to maintain communal contacts, they created passageways through the courtyards from house-to-house.
As it was probably never officially declared, the date of the ghetto’s establishment is unknown; however, according to Scharf, going to the villages in 1941 to buy food meant “risking [one’s] life,” because “the minute that you pass beyond the town’s perimeters, the Polish Police shot right away.” He further claims that several Jews were shot for leaving the town.  Another survivor, Leon Ebel, however, recalls taking off his armband and going to nearby Brzeźnica by bike to obtain food, but does not mention any danger involved in leaving Kalwaria. 
By May 1941, 42 Jews from Kalwaria had been sent to the Pustków labor camp. Another 70 labored in the vicinity, and approximately 50 in Kalwaria proper, mostly pulling down old houses. The number of Jews the local Arbeitsamt required for labor changed frequently, as did their assignments; for example, by autumn 1941 most of the women aged 12 to 45 and men aged 12 to 60 were employed as seasonal laborers in agriculture on surrounding estates.  
On July 1, 1941, a branch of Kraków’s Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in Kalwaria to take over the provision of welfare from the Judenrat. The Judenrat President, Rauch, chaired the committee together with Dr. Breit and a man named Ohrenstein.  With diminishing resources, the soup kitchen was soon serving approximately 200 meals a day, and was thereby forced to cancel free meals and charge everyone. Soon afterwards, a tax was introduced upon the ghetto inmates, as voluntary donations had dried up.
By October 1941, the JSS had opened a so-called “Garden” for poor children aged 6 to 12. It was located on the premises of the ambulatory; the latter was soon transferred to the premises of the Judenrat. Activities were organized for about 80 children for three hours a day.  By the end of January 1942, the number of ghetto inhabitants had risen slightly to 1,093. Records show that all laborers had returned from the labor camps, resulting in a total of 250 Jews employed in Kalwaria.
The date of the Germans’ order for the transfer of Jewish farmers to Kalwaria is unknown; according to Leon Ebel, who moved there from Brzeźnica, it occurred at the beginning of 1942. 
According to Scharf, the situation of Kalwaria’s Jews changed in March 1942, when “Jewish labor became a hot item” and German companies were in constant search of free Jewish labor. At this time, Kalwaria’s Jews were being rounded up, jailed for a short time, and then sent to build the Płaszów labor camp. Those who could find employment in Kalwaria were, in theory, exempted. By mid-August 1942, an estimated 100 Jews had been sent to Płaszów in three separate transports; it is known that the June transport consisted of 60 Jews. The local community was charged with providing the laborers with food and clothing. 
On Kommissar Holtz’s orders, a Jewish police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was set up, either at the end of June or the beginning of July 1942. 
In the first days of August 1942, Hotz informed the ghetto residents that they would be resettled to a work camp in two or three weeks. Having heard about similar reports from other towns, the Jews became suspicious of the Germans’ plans.  Other sources suggest that the community paid a contribution, to try to prevent their deportation.  
On August 12, 1942, the Germans liquidated the Kalwaria Zebrzydowska ghetto, taking up to 1,000 Jews (among them a large number of refugees) to the Skawina ghetto. The latter was liquidated in turn on August 29-30, with most of the inhabitants being sent to the Bełżec extermination camp, while some able-bodied individuals were transferred to the Płaszów labor camp; the Germans separated out the elderly and children in Skawina and shot them in a nearby forest. About 550 of Kalwaria Zebrzydowska’s Jews died in the Holocaust. 
Sources:
The fate of the Jewish community in Kalwaria Zebrzydowska is mentioned in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 315-318; Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), pp. 589-590; E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O zagladzie żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, pp. 87-109, here p. 92; and Gazeta Żydowska (1941-1942).
The following archival sources were used in preparing this entry: AŻIH (301/599 (Relacje) and 211/505 (JSS)); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 27 (Kalwaria Zebrzydowska)); and VHF (# 17120, 11651, and 2480).
Jolanta Kraemer
Kańczuga
Pre-1939: Kańczuga, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kanczuga, Kreis Jaroslau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Kańczuga, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Kańczuga is located 40 kilometers (25 miles) northwest of Przemyśl. There were 948 Jews living there in 1939. 
Upon occupation, Kańczuga’s Jews received German permission to remain in their town, while many other communities in the vicinity were forced to relocate to the Soviet-occupied regions of Poland. In June 1941, the Kańczuga branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) reported 810 Jewish residents.  
Jews living in eleven nearby villages were part of the collective community called Kańczuga-Land (Kańczuga – wieś) with headquarters in Żuklin, located less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) from Kańczuga. Sometime before 1941, 250 members of this predominantly farming community were stripped of their land. Their Judenrat, chaired by a man named Mörsel, continually requested JSS assistance, emphasizing that Kańczuga-Land was “entirely separate” from Kańczuga. In its last letter to the JSS headquarters in Kraków, dated October 2, 1941, the community was reportedly caring for 18 refugees.  
In May 1942, the Kańczuga JSS described the situation as follows: “Since January 1942, the Jews in the Kreis are restricted in their movement. One must not leave [Kańczuga] and as a result the situation of our community has worsened by 100 percent.” Survivor Moses Zellerkraut also noted in his brief testimony that “the Jews cannot leave the town.”  
The ban on Jewish freedom of movement in and out of Kańczuga meant that, in effect, an open ghetto was established, bounded by the town’s limits; this reflected also the general pattern of ghetto establishment in Kreis Jaroslau during the course of the 1941-1942. According to Sefer Lantsut, the head of Kreis Jaroslau, Georg Eisenlohr, issued an order on December 18, 1941 forbidding the Jews from leaving their places of domicile on pain of death. “Domicile” was defined as an urban or rural community, a village, or lodging place. The order went into effect on January 1, 1942. It is very likely that the Kańczuga-Land community was transferred to Kańczuga town, as it was common procedure to concentrate the rural Jewish population in nearby towns; however, no archival documentation could be located to confirm this. In October 1941, the Kańczuga JSS issued its final report, giving the Jewish population as 808 residents. This record was made several months before the likely transfer of the Kańczuga-Land Jews. 
There is a little information available on the fate of Kańczuga’s Jews during the occupation. Most of them occupied Węgierska, Świętej Barbary, and Długa Streets. Szmiel Westreich was the chairman of the Judenrat. Westreich also chaired the JSS branch set up in December 1940, which also included Abraham Turm (secretary) and Aron Freund. The JSS office was located on 79 Długa Street. In mid-September 1941, 17 Jews were rounded up and transferred to the police prison in Jarosław. 
During 1940-1941, there were only three cases of typhus registered. In March 1942, the community was vaccinated for typhus. There was no Jewish doctor in Kańczuga. As of May 1942, 60 Jews were employed in nearby Przeworsk, each day they would return for the night to Kańczuga. 
Survivor Jakub Kesstecher, who moved to Kańczuga in June 1942, testified that there were three large expropriations imposed prior to the liquidation of the community. In July 1942, the Germans began issuing Jewish identity stamps. Only those who received special stamps were to be spared from deportation. At first 350 documents were stamped, yet a subsequent registration reduced the number to 100. After the last registration, conducted on July 28, 1942, only four families were permitted to stay in Kańczuga.  
Secondary sources report that Kańczuga’s liquidation took place on either August 1 or 8, 1942. According to Kesstecher, the community was deported to a transit camp in Pełkinie, where a number of men were selected for labor camps, children and the elderly were shot, and the remainder was sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. Kesstecher, however, does not mention the murder of 246 Jews at the community cemetery in Siedleczka (3 kilometers (1.8 miles) south of Kańczuga), as noted by other primary sources. This may be because the shooting, which took place over three days (around August 12), was conducted after the departure of most of the Jews to Pełkinie. Prior to their execution, Jews were held in an unfinished synagogue in Kańczuga. There were also 20 Jews registered as shot between August and October 1942. The bodies were buried in a private garden on Węgierska Street.  
Sources:
The following publications were used to prepare this entry: Fay Walker and Leo Rosen, Hidden: A Sister and Brother in Nazi Poland (Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 2002.), pp. 51-149; and N. Kudish and M. Walzer-Fass, eds., Sefer Lantsut (Tel Aviv: Irgune yots’e Lantsut be-Yiśrael uve-Artsot ha-Berit, 1963), pp. XXXIV-XXXIX.
The following archival sources refer to the fate of the Jewish community in Kańczuga during the Holocaust: AŻIH (301/4922, 301/4955); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), 211/523-524; RG-15.019M (ASG); RG-02.050).
Jolanta Kraemer
Kołaczyce 
Pre-1939: Kołaczyce (Yiddish: Koloshitz), village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kolaczyce, Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Kołaczyce, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Kołaczyce is located 10 kilometers (6 miles) north of Jasło. The Jewish community occupied a southern neighborhood of the town called Blich (Beilich). According to the archives of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), 203 Jews were residing there on the outbreak of World War II. 
The first chairman of the Judenrat, established in December 1939, is unknown. Survivor Felicia Passal wrote in her memoir that in 1941 her brother, Itzek Fessel (22 years old), chaired the Judenrat. 
The Jews assigned for forced labor would pick up tools each morning from the Judenrat and return them upon completion of their labor. In August 1941, the daily quota of laborers was 25.
A six-man Jewish Police unit was organized. One of its assignments was to supervise Jewish labor. There was also a five-man Polish (Blue) Police unit supervised by the German Schutzpolizei. 
In January 1941, after the Kreishauptmann announced the transfer of a number of deportees to Kołaczyce from Kraków, the Judenrat requested the assistance of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC). Kołaczyce’s Jews had to convert their Bet Midrash into living quarters for the newcomers. 
According to Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Jasło County, the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941. One of the ghettos established around that time was in Kołaczyce. The date when Jews from surrounding villages were ordered into the ghetto is unknown, but this transfer included Jewish residents of Sowin and, most likely, also Bieździedza. 
Sowin Jews were given 24 hours to move into the ghetto. Survivor Thelma Krugman testified that the Germans designated a small area for the ghetto. Her grandfather committed suicide, as he did not want to move there. Krugman’s large family was unable to find housing within the ghetto and received German permission to live outside of its limits in a rented house that was a 10-minute walk from the ghetto. Krugman recalls that one person from each family was forced to report to the Judenrat regularly for assignment to forced labor, which usually consisted of street cleaning.
Up to 14 Jews were executed for leaving the ghetto without permission, probably just before its liquidation in August 1942. 
Sowina native, Genia Krüger (born 1935), whose family was one of those transferred to Kołaczyce, testified: “The Germans would come to the ghetto every week, take away 10 Jews and order the Jews to give them a lot of money [for ransom]. When people did not have the money, they would kill them [the hostages], or they would take the money and kill them anyway.” On those occasions, the Germans would gather all the Jews and usually order them to sweep the streets. 
On July 21, 1941, a branch of the JSS was established in Kołaczyce with Isak Boryl (chairman), Lipa Sperber (deputy), and Bernard Silber. 
According to a Judenrat census, the community numbered 298 Jews – including 82 deportees – in August 1941. Out of eight prewar workshops, only four were still operating (two glaziers, a tailor, and a maker of the upper parts for shoes). According to the Judenrat, a soup kitchen was operating from April 1 until June 25, 1941, and again from August 15, serving 120 breakfasts and dinners. One of the Kraków deportees, Henryk Blunstein, however, reported to the JSS headquarters in Kraków in September 1941 that no soup kitchen had yet been opened in the village. The JSS branch in Kołaczyce was liquidated by the officials in Kraków on September 15, 1941, and all its members were dismissed. Nevertheless, the JSS archives show two transfers (October 4 and 15, 1941) for a total of 600 złoty to be spent on food in Kołaczyce. 
In May 1942, the Gazeta Żydowska reported that the refugees in Kołaczyce were from Żywiec and Kraków; the most recent group had been transferred from the Jasło ghetto. A large number of them lived in the synagogue. On April 1, 1942, a registration of men (aged 16-60) for forced labor took place. On April 20, 15 men were assigned to agricultural work. A soup kitchen, established specifically for their benefit, distributed free breakfasts and dinners. The Jewish Police, who supervised the laborers, also helped in the kitchen. 
According to Wieliczko, Jews from the nearby Brzostek ghetto and a number from surrounding villages were brought to Kołaczyce on August 12, 1942. Following a selection, some were sent to a labor camp in Jasło. Several people were shot during the ensuing liquidation of the ghetto. Others (as many as 260 people) were transported by the Germans to the Podzamcze Forest (also referred to as the Kowalowy Forest) near the village of Krajowice and were shot the same afternoon. Members of the Gestapo from Jasło supervised the mass shooting.  
Members of the Baudienst (labor battalion for Poles) in Jasło were forced to dig the graves for the Kołaczyce Jews. Two witnesses from the Baudienst (Jan Rączka and Władysław M.) testified that the Jews were gathered in a clearing. In groups of 10, the victims were led to the grave and forced to undress. Standing by the grave, one by one, they were shot in the back of their head. Rączka, a native of Kołaczyce, recognized among the victims the families of Waldman, Rosner Kraut, Rand, Szlam, and others. Salka (nee Wald) was pregnant. Baudienst workers had to disguise the grave by planting trees on top of it.   
Sources:
The following sources include references to the Kołaczyce ghetto: Mieczysław Wieliczko, Jasielskie w latach drugiej wojny swiatowej (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, 1974), pp. 131, 148, 182-184; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), p. 78; Stanisław Zabierowski, Rzeszowskie pod okupacją hitlerowską (Warsaw: Książka i Wiedza, 1975), pp. 183-185; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 238.
Archival sources: AŻIH (210/413, 211/551, 301/4698, 301/7164); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)); and VHF (# 40037).
Jolanta Kraemer
Kolbuszowa
Pre-1939: Kolbuszowa, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Reichshof, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Kolbuszowa is located about 150 kilometers (94 miles) east of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, around 2,500 Jews were residing in the town.
Following the German invasion on September 1, 1939, many Jewish refugees arrived in Kolbuszowa. Upon capture of the town, about two weeks later, German soldiers began kidnapping Jews for forced labor, and searching Jewish homes for valuables. At this time, many Jewish homes were burned down and looted.
In the fall of 1939, Gestapo men arrived in Kolbuszowa and took several Jews hostage, threatening to kill them if the Jews did not leave town within a few days. A number of Jews fled to the Soviet-occupied zone, but several days later the evacuation order was rescinded and some Jews who had left returned. In mid-November, German soldiers requisitioned most of the Jews’ remaining food and merchandise.  
In December 1939, Jews over the age of 12 were required to wear white badges bearing a blue Star of David. Initially the penalty for noncompliance was a 100 złoty fine, but subsequently the death penalty was introduced for this offense.
On January 25, 1940, the Germans established a Sonderdienst police unit in Kolbuszowa, composed mainly of young ethnic Germen men. The German Police soon found it difficult to find the 150 to 200 Jewish forced laborers demanded daily. So a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in March 1940, headed by Dr. Leon Anderman. The Jews were registered and performed forced labor in rotation. The payment for a replacement was initially a loaf of black bread, and later only half or a quarter of a loaf. The Judenrat also paid bribes to the Germans to halt the ransacking of Jewish homes, to release detained Jews, and to obtain permits for Jewish train travel. It raised funds for this by taxing the Jews. 
In July 1940, all Jews aged 12 through 60 were registered and issued work cards. On September 9, German officials selected 50 Jewish men to be sent to the forced labor camp in Rzeszów. Two months later, the Judenrat arranged for their release. In November another roundup occurred; this time 80 Jews were chosen for forced labor in Pustków.
In June 1941, Landkommissar Twardon arrived in Kolbuszowa. On June 12, he ordered the resettlement to Rzeszów of Jews living in the market square. This measure decreased the Jewish population prior to the establishment of a ghetto. On June 13, Twardon gave the Jews only 48 hours to move into the ghetto, which was located in the poorest section of town, where 700 Jews and 90 Poles resided. Now the Poles were relocated to make space for 1,100 additional Jews in this area. The ghetto was bordered on the east by the river, on the west by Sędziszew Street, and on the north by the “Golden Row.” It did not include the market square, where Jewish shops were transferred to Poles. 
For the relocation, the Jews lacked transport and feared not making the deadline. On the second day, the German police increased the panic by beating up any Jews they encountered. That night they surrounded the ghetto and arrested 26 Jews, including most of the Judenrat. Efforts were made to obtain the release of Dr. Anderman, with the involvement of some Polish notables, but Twardon refused, and a new Judenrat was formed with Paszek Rappaport at its head. 
Soon afterwards, the new Judenrat raised the money demanded to purchase the return of those Jews who had been relocated to Rzeszów. The arrested Jews were sent to Auschwitz. Within a short time, most were killed and the Gestapo insisted the families sign statements confirming the alleged cause of death. 
In the ghetto clothing and shoes were made from old rags and scraps of wood. Hunger was severe. The Judenrat established a public kitchen, where many Jews received their only meal of the day. Smuggling into the ghetto was accomplished through permits to travel outside, arranged by Rappaport for a high price. The Judenrat and a few of Rappaport’s friends obtained permits, enabling them to smuggle in food, kerosene, soap, wood, and other needed items, at the risk of their lives. 
On January 5, 1942, posters were put up around the ghetto, signed by Kreishauptmann Dr. Heinz Ehaus, prohibiting Germans and other “Aryans” from entering the ghetto without a special pass.  This measure probably resulted from a fear of the spread of typhus. In January 1942, the Germans demanded that the Jews surrender all fur items on pain of death.
In February 1942, the Jewish Police was established, to assist the Judenrat with its functions. Landkommissar Twardon enacted many new decrees, such as, forcing Jews to shave their beards, and demanding a ransom of 5 kilos (11 pounds) of gold for the lives of 15 Jews. On April 28, 1942, the Gestapo arrested and shot more than 20 Jews according to a list prepared by a Ukrainian informant, who served in the police. When Twardon learned that three Jews had only been wounded, he sent his doctor, who uncovered the wounds and left the men to die. 
The murdered Jews were buried in mass graves in the Jewish cemetery. However, their family members dug up the corpses and put a knife in each right hand to symbolize revenge, before reburying them in family plots. 
Three days later the Gestapo demanded various luxury items, including silk stockings, wool for suits, and canaries in cages. If the items were not produced by evening, another execution was threatened. As they could not be found in the ghetto, several Jews snuck out and bought the items at high prices from Poles. When the Gestapo men were satisfied the demands had been met, they left. 
Conditions steadily deteriorated as starvation increased. New decrees were issued and shootings became commonplace. Jews believed that in order to remain in the ghetto, they must be productive. Therefore, a cooperative workshop was established in the ghetto synagogue. After an inspection of the workshop, the Germans announced that the workers and their families could remain in Kolbuszowa.
In June 1942, Kreishauptmann Ehaus made repeated financial demands of the Jewish communities in the Kreis, which had to be paid within one week. If payment was incomplete, members of the respective Judenrat were murdered, corresponding to the deficient sum. Each time, the various Judenrat members were summoned to Rzeszów to hand over the money. According to Salsitz’s account, Kolbuszowa was the only Judenrat that managed to pay each sum in full and therefore suffered no losses to its Judenrat. 
After the executions, Ehaus announced that all Jews in the Kreis would be evacuated to Rzeszów by June 25-27. Panic and fear spread through the ghetto, as the residents quickly prepared for their departure. In preparation, the Judenrat used its remaining flour to bake one loaf of bread for every person.
On June 25, 1942, approximately 100 SS men encircled the ghetto and then drove the Jews out of their houses to the gates. All the Jews’ possessions were loaded onto peasants’ wagons, leaving no space for the Jews, so that everyone had to go on foot, escorted by the German and Polish police. On arrival in Rzeszów, the peasants demanded payment for the transportation, threatening otherwise to steal the Jews’ possessions. 
The second evacuation the next day was much smaller, but conducted in the same manner. Afterwards, thousands of peasants poured in to take property from the abandoned Jewish homes. A token sum was paid, to make it appear that this was not looting. Only three Jews remained in the ghetto to run the cobbler’s cooperative, making suits and boots for the German Police. 
On June 28, 1942, Twardon went to Rzeszów and ordered a group of Jewish men to return to Kolbuszowa to dismantle the ghetto houses. The men were housed in the Bet Midrash, now called the “Kolbuszowa Labor Camp.” Some Kolbuszowa Jews were sent from Rzeszów to the Jasionka labor camp, where most were murdered or died of starvation. The other Kolbuszowa Jews in Rzeszów were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
A few Jews survived in hiding, in the camps, or as partisans in the forests. Some survivors were murdered by Poles, when they returned home, and many emigrated soon afterward.  The Jewish community of Kolbuszowa was not reestablished after the war.
Sources:
Much of this entry is based on the detailed account by Naftali Salsitz, “The Holocaust in Kolbuszowa,” in I.M. Biderman, ed., Pinkas Kolbishov (New York: United Kolbushover, 1971), pp. 56-88; a more personalized account by the same author (after he changed his name to) Norman Salsitz, Against All Odds: A Tale of Two Survivors (New York: Holocaust Library, 1990), adds some further details. Other relevant publications include: Guy Miron, ed., The Yad Vashem Encyclopedia of the Ghettos During the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2010), pp. 329-331; and Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 237.
Documentation concerning the fate of the Jews in Kolbuszowa during the Holocaust can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/545-546); IPN (ASG, sygn. 58, p. 64); USHMM (e.g., RG-50.030*0199; RG-15.019M); USHMMPA (WS # N64876); VHF (# 3331 and 16458); and YVA.
Shannon Phillips and Martin Dean
Korczyna
Pre-1939: Korczyna, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: village, initially in Kreis Jaslo, then from November 1941, Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Korczyna is located 5 kilometers (3 miles) northeast of Krosno. There were 796 Jews living in the town of Korczyna in 1921.
After the German occupation of Korcyzna in mid-September 1939, various German military units were garrisoned in the town for several months. During their stay they requisitioned Jewish houses and forced Jews to work for them as servants. They frequently searched Jewish homes and stores, beating the owners, and taking whatever they liked.
In March 1940, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established, with J. Rubin as the chairman and Salomon Horowitz as his deputy. Jakob Sprung, Chaskel Lutman (or Lautmann), and Raffael Rachwall were also members.
According to the town’s yizkor book, Korczyna’s Jews were asked to choose their representatives. Apparently, the chairman Rubin and his assistant “Lewitman” (probably Lautmann) disappointed the Jews of Korczyna, as they “took matters into their own hands and ignored the rest of the Judenrat.” They received a salary from the Germans and had to implement German instructions. Those who failed to pay a monthly tax imposed by the Judenrat had their possessions (e.g., Shabbat candle holders, pillows, clothing, etc.) confiscated by the Jewish Police. The Judenrat asked the Germans for help on occasion. Arrestees were sent to the Krosno prison; there were also cases when Jews were shot in Korczyna.  
By April 1940, the Judenrat had opened a soup kitchen serving three meals daily. The poorest received them for free, while others paid 20 to 30 groszy per day. 
By September 1940, there were 20 refugees from Kraków, 17 from Łódź, and 15 Jewish families from Germany living in Korczyna. On March 27, 1941, the Krosno Landkommissar ordered the transfer of 119 Jews from Krosno to Korczyna. The same day, the Jaslo Kreishauptmann also directed 22 Jews there from Jasło. On April 8, 1941, 75 more Jasło Jews were transferred and housed with the other recent arrivals in Korczyna. Most of them were refugees from Łódź. At this time, a total of 50 refugees from Kraków were living in the village.
In May 1941, a two-man Jewish police force was established. One of the policemen, Naphtali Kirschner, would forewarn the community of raids by the Polish Police. In June 1941, Jewish-owned stores were confiscated.  
A local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was set up in Korczyna in July 1941 to provide relief for the town’s poor and refugees. It included chairman Salomon Horowitz, Jakub Sprung, and Izrael Isak Denn. The branch was liquidated in September 1941. The reasons for its liquidation included insignificant aid delivered, the small size of the Jewish population, and infighting among its members. For example, Horowitz requested the dismissal of Sprung and Denn as their “age and appearance” made them “unfit for the job.”  
An unfenced ghetto located on the market square of Korczyna was set up in November 1941.  Poles – most likely – were not evicted from the ghetto grounds and continued to share some houses with the Jewish population. For example, during the ghetto’s liquidation, survivor Rosa Walker and her son, Hendrik, did not report to the market square, “instead hiding in the attic of the house they lived in, which belonged to [a Pole] Stanisław Pudło.”
In January 1942, the German authorities ordered the Jews to surrender all their fur garments or face the death penalty. The Jews responded and brought even their old worn out fur hats to the Judenrat, who passed them on to the Germans. Two days later, the Germans searched the Jews’ homes to check for concealed items, but they found nothing and the town suffered no casualties. 
It is not clear who was in charge of the ghetto’s security. According to the yizkor book, Jews were forbidden to leave the Korczyna ghetto by March or April 1942. The Germans posted signs indicating the limits of the Jewish area. Jews could walk to Godele Gutwein’s house, to Herz Halpern’s house, to Mangel Street, to the pharmacy and to Pszyslowski’s house. Any Jew caught outside this demarcated area faced the death penalty.  A. Potocki mentions that a man was shot for leaving “the ghetto” before this, in December 1941. Also, a 38-year-old, Lejb Korb, is registered as having been shot by the police in November 1941; the precise reason why he was killed, however, is not known. 
Survivor Aron Neubarth, who moved to the ghetto when rural Jews were brought in (in June 1942), testified that Korczyna’s Jews were allowed to leave the ghetto only for organized labor assignments. Those who were assigned to work at an airfield or on road construction in Krosno would gather daily in the market square, and then march from Korczyna unescorted. In the evening they would return to the ghetto – again unescorted. Otherwise, Jews were afraid to leave the ghetto, and rarely attempted to sneak out. 
By January 1942, the ghetto had 700 Jewish inhabitants. Forced labor continued, approximately 80 men then walked daily to Krosno for snow removal. They were paid a small compensation and given a hot meal by Krosno’s Jewish community. The sanitary commission continued to check Jewish households for signs of contagious diseases, finding none. In May 1942, Jews aged from 6 to 60 years old were vaccinated against typhus. Dr. Bucholz attended to the sick.  
The concentration of the rural Jews of the Kreis in ghettos began on June 24, 1942. By that date, the number of Jews in Korczyna had reached 1,200. The JSS branch was reopened on June 28, 1942, most likely due to the increase in the number of ghetto inmates. The reorganized branch was now led by a refugee from Kraków, Aleksander Choczner, with assistance from Wolf Gleicher and pharmacist Jakub Lewaj. They kept the soup kitchen open and organized a daycare in the ghetto for 55 children aged 4 to 9. 
All Jews aged 14 to 60 were obliged to work at this time. Women and young girls performed agricultural labor. In June 1942, Korczyna’s Jews were ordered to pay overdue taxes, allegedly outstanding from when the war started.  
On July 30, 1942, 300 Jews, who were comprised of deportees from Łódź that were living in Krosno, were moved to Korczyna. Due to the lack of lodging, most of them were quartered in the town’s synagogue. Their hygiene was so poor that the JSS ordered free of charge hair-clipping, shaving, and bathing for all newcomers.  
The ghetto was liquidated on August 12, 1942.  Korczyna’s Jews were ordered to report to the market square. The Germans possessed a list of all the inhabitants and their addresses. House searches for those in hiding were conducted, while the remaining Jews were sitting in the square. According to Pinkas ha-kehilot, trucks took old and sick Jews to the vicinity of Wola Janicka, where they were then shot. The Rejestr miejsc, however, reports that on the same day, the SS and the Gestapo shot several dozen Jewish families in the Wawrzyce Forest; some of their names are available. 
As for the remainder of the ghetto’s inmates, women and children were deported to Krosno on trucks, while men walked there under the escort of Ukrainian auxiliary forces.  On August 14, 1942, Korczyna’s Jews were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Out of 140 Jews who were selected to remain and labor in Korczyna, 70 were taken to the Krosno ghetto. In December 1942, they were transferred together with the remaining Jews of that ghetto to the ghetto in Rzeszów and then dispersed among various camps.
Sources:
The following publications include information on the Korczyna ghetto: Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich i Muzeum Regionalne PTTK im. Adama Fastnachta w Brzozowie, 1993), p. 35; Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 326-328; and Shmuel Krakowski and Sara Bender, eds., The Encyclopedia of the Righteous Among the Nations: Rescuers of Jews during the Holocaust – Poland (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2004), p. 652.
The yizkor book, Korczyna; sefer zikaron (New York: Committee of the Korczyna Memorial Book, 1967) contains information on the German occupation and a translation by William Leibner is on the Web at www.jewishgen.org/yizkor/korczyna.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (211/471, 211/472, 211/570, 211/650(JSS)); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M (ASG)); and VHF (# 38834).
Jolanta Kraemer
Kraków
Pre-1939: Kraków, city and województwo center, Poland; 1939-1945: Krakau, Kreis and Distrikt center, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Kraków, powiat center, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Kraków is located about 290 kilometers (181 miles) south of Warsaw. In 1931, the Jewish population of the city was 56,800.
On September 6, 1939, the German army entered Kraków. At the time of the invasion, many men, Jews and non-Jews alike, fled the city, often with other family members. However, German bombing and the rapid advance of the Wehrmacht forced many to return to the city.
Anti-Jewish Aktions and measures began immediately. German soldiers kidnapped Jews for forced labor, humiliated them in the streets, and also arrested and killed some of them, seemingly at random. Jewish homes and businesses were looted. Between October and December 1939, Jewish homes were searched by the German occupiers, and a curfew was decreed. Anyone caught disobeying the curfew could be shot. German officials exploited the searches to steal or confiscate items that were illegal for Jews to possess, such as gold, jewelry, and foreign currency.
On September 8, 1939, all Jewish enterprises were required to be marked with a Star of David. Also at this time, Jews were removed from breadlines. A survivor, Mieczysław Staner, recalls: “In Kazimierz, the old Jewish quarter of Cracow, Orthodox Jews were dragged out of their homes into the streets to be beaten by the drunken SS-troopers and tortured sadistically by having their beards torn out or being set on fire, to the amusement of the offenders and horror of the onlookers.” 
On September 13, 1939, all Jewish synagogues and prayer houses were closed. On the holiest day of the Jewish year, Yom Kippur, Jews were required to fill in anti-tank ditches. Shortly afterwards, in October 1939, the Jews of Kraków were registered by the Municipal Registration Offices “on special registration forms marked with a yellow band.” 
On October 26, 1939, Generalgouverneur Hans Frank ordered the Jews subject to forced labor and instituted special Jewish labor battalions.  In November and December, almost all Jewish schools were closed and Jewish teachers also dismissed from non-Jewish schools. Jewish families responded by organizing clandestine classrooms, where parents or private tutors taught children in small groups. 
In November 1939, a census conducted by the Judenrat counted 68,482 Jews in Kraków and a few neighboring places (including, Skawina, Prokocim, and Borek Fałęcki).  In December 1939, a 24-member Jewish council (Judenrat) was formally recognized in Kraków by the German authorities. It had already been established in September at the request of SS-Oberscharführer Paul Siebert, who ordered Marek Bieberstein, a teacher and public activist, to become its head. The vice president was Dr. Wilhelm Goldblat. The Judenrat offices were located at 41 Krakowska Street. Subsequently in the ghetto, the Jewish communal leadership had its offices at the corner of Limanowski Street and Rynek Podgórski.  The Germans held the Judenrat personally responsible for carrying out all their demands, and the Jewish community was ordered to obey the Judenrat.
From December 1, 1939, all Jews above age 12 were required to wear a Star of David on their right arm. A curfew was instituted for Jews from 9:00 P.M. to 5:00 A.M. From January 1, 1940, Jews were forbidden to change residence without permission, and by the end of January Jews were no longer allowed to travel by rail.  Despite these restrictions, the number of Jews in Kraków continued to increase, as refugees arrived, especially from those parts of Poland incorporated into the Reich. In January and February 1940, Jewish businesses were seized and a trustee institution was set up to organize their transfer to Germans and ethnic Germans, with businesses of lesser value being given to Poles or Ukrainians.
In April 1940, Hans Frank determined that his capital city of Kraków should become the “most Jew-free city” in the Generalgouvernement. He ordered that the vast bulk of Kraków’s more than 60,000 Jews be expelled and dispersed among smaller towns and villages in the Distrikt, while only about 10,000 Jews were to remain as indispensable skilled workers.  To implement these instructions, Stadthauptmann Dr. Carl Schmid announced on May 18, that by August 15, the Jewish population was to be reduced to 15,000 workers and their families.  To encourage Jews to leave, those who left voluntarily were permitted to take their possessions with them. By June 1, the Jewish population in Kraków had declined to 54,517.  Many Jews left for Warsaw, Bochnia, Kielce, and other places.
In July 1940, the forcible removal of the Jewish population of Kraków commenced. Only those Jews able to obtain permits indicating that they were economically necessary to the Germans could remain in the city. At the end of August, several thousand Jews who could not obtain permits were forced to leave the city, being allowed to take with them only 25 kilograms (55.1 pounds) of possessions. By the beginning of October the population of the city had declined by about 50 percent.
Stadthauptmann Schmid decided to do his part to decrease the Jews in town by ordering the arrest of Dr. Bieberstein. During the mass expulsions, Bieberstein attempted to bribe the authorities to allow more Jews to remain in Kraków. He was arrested, and after his release 18 months later, he was sent to the Płaszów forced labor camp, where he died in 1944. The second chairman of the Judenrat was Dr. Ahron Artur Rosenzweig.
Between October and December 1940, there was a slight increase in the city’s Jewish population, as some Jews who had fled to the surrounding areas returned to Kraków. To inhibit this, Dr. Otto Wächter, governor of Distrikt Krakau, issued an order on November 25, 1940, banning all Jews without special permits from residing in the city.  Deportation transports to a number of smaller towns in Distrikt Lublin had commenced on November 12, 1940. Almost 10,000 Jews from Kraków were dispatched to Distrikt Lublin on more than 40 transports up to March 20, 1941. 
On March 3, 1941, governor Wächter, citing sanitary, economic, and police considerations, announced the establishment of a Jewish residential district, a ghetto, in the poor Kraków suburb of Podgórze. Jews had until March 20, 1941, to move into the designated area, which lay on the left bank of the Vistula River. Furniture and other items, which could not be taken into the new accommodations, had to be offered first to the Trustee Office (Treuhand-Aussenstelle Krakau), and could only be sold freely, once released by that office.  The relocation period was extended to the end of April 1941, when the last Jews were moved into the ghetto. In the weeks following the decree, thousands more Jews fled Kraków to avoid enclosure in the ghetto. Approximately 15,000 Jewish workers resided in the ghetto area and another 2,500 officially lived outside the ghetto walls. 
The ghetto area stretched from Rynek Podgórski to the end of Limanowski Street and from Józefińska Street to Plac Zgody to the foot of Krzemionki Hill. In all, it consisted of 15 streets, 320 houses and a total of 3,167 rooms. During April 1941, a wooden fence and a 2-3 meter (6.6 to 9.8 feet) high wall, evoking the look of Jewish gravestones, were erected around the ghetto, and doors and windows facing the Aryan side of the ghetto were ordered to be bricked up.  The main entrance gate at Rynek Podgórski “was ornamented with a huge blue Star of David and a sign in German, but written using Hebrew letters, spelling ‘Jüdische Wohnbezirk’ (Jewish Residential Area).”  In addition to this main entrance, there were entrances at Lwowska Street, at Plac Zgody, and two entrances on Limanowski Street. A trolley ran through the ghetto, but it was forbidden to stop there.
Initially, the Jews were able to enter and exit the ghetto more or less whenever they chose; however, this freedom was short-lived, as just a few weeks later the ghetto gates were closed, and Jews needed permits to enter and exit the ghetto. The ghetto was guarded by German and Polish (Blue) Police externally, as well as by the Jewish Police (Jüdischer Ordungsdienst) internally. The Jewish Police had been established by the Gestapo in the summer of 1940, and was headed by Simcha Spira, a glazier by trade, who had been a religious man before the war.  The Jewish Police in Kraków subsequently earned a bad reputation for its inhumanity to other Jews, including participation in German roundups.
Other ghetto institutions included health care services. One survivor reported: “Three hospitals were within the walls of the ghetto, the General Hospital located on the corner of Józefińska and Węgierska streets, the Epidemic Hospital on Rękawka Street, and the Hospital for the Disabled and Psychologically Ill on Plac Zgody.”  There was also an old age home and an orphanage.
The ghetto also had a German Labor Office, which set wages at four to five złoty per day, the cost of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds) of bread. Approximately 60 percent of the ghetto residents worked outside the ghetto walls, in various factories, at the airfield, or cleaning offices for German officials. Each worker needed a permit in order to leave the ghetto, and this required a monthly identity card renewal. There were also several factories inside the ghetto. Some were traditional factories such as the “Madritch Uniform Factory” in the former “Optima” chocolate factory, which was owned by an Austrian industrialist and member of the SS. Madritch saved many Jews during the war. The more famous Oskar Schindler also used Jewish labor in his Kraków factory, which became a Nazi subcamp, and thereby saved 1,098 Jews.
Others worked in home-based enterprises, such as making brushes, which they then sold in bulk to the Germans. There were also a number of private business operations, which relied on the ability of Jews to enter and exit the ghetto with their products.
Various cultural and religious activities continued within the ghetto. Zionist groups organized secret study groups, and at least three synagogues and other religious study houses remained in use. There was even a café on the corner of Limanowski Street and Rynek Podgórski offering live music, including the Rosener Players, and the ghetto pharmarcy served as a place where people could read official and underground newspapers and discuss daily problems. 
In October and November 1941, conditions deteriorated further, as 27 smaller communities around Kraków were incorporated into the city and an additional 5,000 Jews from these places were forced to move into the ghetto. In December 1941, the receipt and sending of postal packages was forbidden. Then in January 1942, Jews were ordered to surrender their furs under penalty of death. Some people destroyed their furs rather than hand them over. Others stood in the freezing cold to hand over their furs at the designated building on Limanowski Street. Altogether some 8,000 fur items were collected.
In 1941 and the first half of 1942, there were repeated arrests and roundups of Jews in the ghetto. Some had their names put on lists by Jewish Police chief Spira, or by a Jewish Gestapo agent named Szymon Szpic, and were deported to Distrikt Lublin, as the ghetto was too overcrowded. Others were taken away by the Gestapo directly.  
The German Security Police conducted the first mass deportation to the Bełżec extermination camp from Distrikt Krakau, following an Aktion in the Kraków ghetto on June 1-8, 1942. Between March and May of 1942, the Kraków Jews were registered. Those who had trades were given stamps on their ID cards (Kennkarten), whereas those who were unemployed or had white-collar professions were denied the stamp. During the mass deportation in early June, those without the stamp were rounded up and deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.  Approximately 150 Jews were shot during the Aktion, including the poet Mordechai Gebirtig.  In total some 7,000 Jews from Kraków were deported at this time.
On June 7, 1942, in preparation for the final roundup of the Aktion, a registration was conducted in the offices of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS). Those Jews needed as workers received a blue card stamped by the SS and Police Leader (SSPF) attached to their ID cards. Those who did not receive a blue card were taken to the Optima factory courtyard, from which they were deported to Bełżec the next day.  During the June Aktion of 1942, the head of the Judenrat, Rosenzweig, refused to cooperate with the deportations. As punishment, he and his family were sent to Bełżec. He was replaced by the third and final Judenrat leader in Kraków, Dawid Gutter.
Shortly after the June Aktion, on the orders of Stadthauptmann Rudolf Pavlu, who had succeeded Schmid in September 1941, the ghetto was reduced considerably in size. 
Jewish resistance organizations conducted activities both outside and within the ghetto. Various prewar youth groups reconnected after the initial invasion and began training their members in weapon usage, implementing mutual assistance programs, and engaging in a variety of underground activities. Important among these groups were Akiva, a prewar religious Zionist pioneer youth movement, led by Adolf “Dolek” Liebeskind and Ha-Shomer Ha-Za’ir, a prewar socialist Zionist youth movement, led by Zvi “Heshek” Bauminger. The underground groups were organized into cells of five and engaged in various actions. They eventually merged in the autumn of 1942 into the Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa (Jewish Fighting Organization), which had been formed in the Warsaw ghetto.
The resistance fighters killed off Gestapo informants, stole German uniforms being produced in the ghetto, and carried out other acts of resistance. Outside the ghetto walls, they set fire to the German garage at Grzegórzki, which at the time was full of Organisation Todt vehicles, threw grenades into an officers’ mess, carried out directed assassinations, and attacked German checkpoints.  The largest attack, carried out on December 22, 1942, was the bombing of the Cyganeria and Esplanada Cafés. In the aftermath of these operations, the hiding place of the ghetto fighters was discovered and those captured in the bunker were tortured. In the end, some of the arrestees revealed the locations of others and the underground organization in the Kraków ghetto was severely disrupted. 
The second major deportation Aktion occurred on October 28, 1942, when at least 6,000 Jews were sent to their deaths, and another 600 were killed on the spot. One survivor described the deportation of the children from the orphanage on Józefińska Street: “SS soldiers arrived at the orphanage in trucks and herded all the children into them, piled on top of each other. The younger ones and the babies were thrown inside through the windows of the trucks, onto the children already inside. Their screams were heard from afar, reaching all corners and breaking hearts, but apparently they never reached the heavens.”  Two hospitals and an old-people’s home were also completely cleared during this Aktion, which was directed by SSPF SS-Sturmbannführer Willi Haase, who by then had succeeded Julian Scherner in this post. 
Following the Aktion, the ghetto area was again reduced. Then on December 6, 1942, the remnant ghetto inhabitants were divided into two sections: Ghetto A for those who were able to work and Ghetto B for those unable to work. The final liquidation of the Kraków ghetto, personally supervised by Haase and carried out by SS-Sturmführer Amon Leopold Goeth, began on March 13, 1943. The able-bodied from Ghetto A, at least 8,000 people, were marched to the Płaszów labor camp. The remaining people, including all the inhabitants of Ghetto B, were either murdered in the ghetto or transported to their deaths, with some 1,000 being sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where all but 15 men and 26 women were sent straight to the gas chambers.  Following this, the Judenrat members also were sent to Płaszów, where Gutter was murdered upon his arrival.
Only around 2,000 Jews from Kraków survived the German occupation.
A number of postwar trials dealt with crimes committed in Kraków. Amon Leopold Goeth, the infamous commandant of the Płaszów forced labor camp, was extradited to Poland, where he was tried in 1946. He was found guilty, sentenced to death, and executed by hanging. 
Sources:
Information on the fate of Kraków’s Jews during the Holocaust can be found in the following publications: Arieh L. Bauminger, The Fighters of the Cracow Ghetto (Jerusalem: Keter Press, 1986); Aleksander Bieberstein, Zagłada Żydów w Krakowie (Kraków: Wydawn. Literackie, 2001); Anna Jodłowiec-Dziedzic, The Holocaust of Cracow Jews 1939-1945 (Kraków: Historical Museum of the City of Kraków, 2004); Felicja Karay, The Women of Ghetto Krakow (Tel Aviv, 2001); Anna Pióro, The Cracow Ghetto 1941-1943: A Guide to the Area of the Former Ghetto (Kraków: Historical Museum of the City of Kraków, 2005); Roman Pytel, “Destruction of the Jewish Community in Cracow,” in Memorial Journal in Honor of Jews from Cracow Perished 1939-1945 (New York: New Kraków Friendship Society, 1967); Aleksander B. Skotnicki, Oskar Schindler in the Eyes of Cracovian Jews Rescued by Him (Kraków: Wydawn. AA, 2008); Katarzyna Zimmerer, Zamordowany świat: losy Żydów w Krakowie 1939-1945 (Kraków: Wydawn. Literackie, 2004); Proces Ludobójcy Amona Goetha (Kraków: Centralna Żydowska Komisja Historyczna w Polsce, 1947).
Relevant published memoirs and documentation include: Tadeusz Pankiewicz, The Cracow Ghetto Pharmacy (New York: Holocaust Library, 1987); Malvina Graf, The Kraków Ghetto and the Płaszόw Camp Remembered (Tallehassee: The Florida State University Press, 1989); Mieczysław Staner, The Eyewitness (Kraków: Wydawnictwo “Hagada” and Argona-Jarden, 1999); Zvi Barlev-Bleicher, Would God It Were Night: The Ordeal of a Jewish Boy from Cracow-Through Auschwitz, Mauthausen, and Gusen (Vantage Press, 1991); and Every Day Lasts a Year: A Jewish Family’s Correspondence from Poland, introduced and edited by Christopher R. Browning, Richard S. Hollander, and Nechama Tec (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007). 
Relevant documentation can be found in these archives: AAN; APKra (e.g., collection 450); AŻIH (e.g., 211/583-596, 218, 301, and 302 collections); BA-BL (e.g., R 52III/22); BA-L; IPN (e.g., NTN 39-47); NARA; USHMM (e.g., RG-02.107, 143, 168; RG-15.026M (Records of the Generalgouvernement); RG-15.072M (Jewish council in Kraków (mostly 1939-1940)); RG-15.098 (Stadthauptmann der Stadt Krakau); Acc.1998.A.0248); VHF; YVA (e.g., M-1/E/22).
Helene Sinnreich, Shannon Phillips, and Martin Dean
Krosno
Pre-1939: Krosno, town, Jasło powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: initially Kreis Jaslo, then from November 1941, center of Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Krosno is located about 152 kilometers (95 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, there were about 2,500 Jews living in Krosno, and another 5,870 in the neighboring towns and villages.
In the first days of World War II, some of Krosno’s Jews fled east into what soon became the Soviet-occupied zone of Poland. At the same time many Jewish refugees from western Poland also arrived in Krosno. The German army occupied Krosno on September 9, 1939, and soon a program of mistreatment, plunder, and murder began. A Gestapo office was set up in the town, headed by SS-Hauptsturmführer Gustav Schmatzler (sentenced to death by the Special Criminal Court in Rzeszów after the war), and his deputy SS-Obersturmführer Ludwig von Davier. Other officials included SS-Untersturmführer Stengler (Stentzler) and Oskar Bäcker. From October 1939 to May 1940, Walter Thormeyer and Albert Schulz served in the Grenzpolizei (Border Police) unit in Krosno. 
At the end of 1939 or in early 1940, the Germans appointed a Judenrat headed by Juda Engel, who was assisted by his deputy Moshe Kleiner. The chairman was viewed favorably by most Jews. The Judenrat was required to provide forced laborers, consisting mainly of impoverished refugees, to work at the military airport in Krosno and at a labor camp in Frysztak. The Judenrat paid the workers small wages out of contributions collected from wealthier Jews, who were exempted from forced labor. Several Jews worked at an oil refinery in Jedlicze, and about 160 Jews worked in factories.
In December 1939, there were about 500 resettled Jews in Krosno (400 of them having been expelled from Łódź), along with about 400 local Jews, who were all in need of support. According to a subsequent report, by April 1941, another 600 Jews had been resettled there from Kraków. At that time, there were about 1,400 Jews in need of support in Krosno. In June 1941, the Krosno branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established under the leadership of Juda Engel, and later of Samuel Rosshandler. Up to the end of 1941, the shammes (or sexton) Silberberg organized a shelter in the synagogue for arriving refugees. 
As of June 22, 1941, there were 2,072 Jews in Krosno: 1,187 women and 885 men. Of these, 172 were 60 years of age or older, and 395 were under 12 (including 84 infants of less than three years). Only 544 Jews were capable of working (26.3 percent).
As of mid-November 1941, there was no Jewish district in the town, which the chairman of the Judenrat ascribed to his own efforts. Jewish stores remained open. The Judenrat ran a school for Jewish students; it also maintained a shelter for refugees, a community kitchen that distributed about 200 meals a day; and a shelter for about 12 elderly single women. Until 1942, the Jews of Krosno were allowed to live in their prewar homes, but the Germans imposed a curfew, prohibitions on schooling and religious observance, and food could only be obtained at certain times and places. 
Up to November 1941, Krosno was part of Kreis Jaslo, but following the incorporation of Distrikt Galizien within the Generalgouvernement, in the summer of 1941, Krosno became the center of its own Kreis. In November 1941, the Germans permitted 85 Jews to return to Krosno from Distrikt Galicia, which until June 1941 had been under Soviet occupation. On November 19, 1941, about 100 Jews from Krosno were sent to the nearby towns of Brzozów, Jasienica Rosielna, Jasło, Korczyna, Rymanów, and Nowy Żmigród. In December 1941, the Jews were ordered to surrender all fur items of clothing on pain of death.
At the end of July or the beginning of August 1942, the Germans demanded a “contribution” from the Judenrat, claiming that it would postpone their resettlement. The Jews managed to collect the money, although they were also providing assistance to the Strzyżów Judenrat. 
On August 10, 1942 (the Jewish mourning day Tisha B’Av), the first deportation Aktion took place. Members of the Security Police, Order Police, and Waffen-SS, as well as Polish and Ukrainian auxiliary police units surrounded the town. The Germans conducted a selection and issued work permits to young and able-bodied Jews. About 120 Jews, mainly the sick and disabled, were taken away to a forest and shot, and about 1,000 Jews were sent by train to the Bełżec extermination camp. Afterwards, the Germans conducted thorough searches for any Jews in hiding. 
The sources unanimously agree that there was a ghetto in Krosno, but the recollections of survivors contain some contradictions. One survivor recalls that in May 1942 the Germans ordered the preparation of a ghetto area. The ghetto was to be located in four or five houses on Franciszkańska Street. Jews were allowed to exit the ghetto only with a permit. One Polish and one Jewish policeman guarded the gate.  While some survivors recall it as an open ghetto, others describe walls surrounding the ghetto.  Some survivors claim that the ghetto was guarded and one needed a permit to leave the ghetto to go to work; others claim that the ghetto was only a sleeping area for workers, and it was possible to sneak in and out.  Finally, a number of survivors recall that the Krosno ghetto was established the night after the first deportation Aktion on August 10, 1942. 
The trial verdict of the court in Bonn concludes that on the night of August 10, 1942 (after the Aktion), the Germans established the Krosno ghetto for the remaining Jews. It was an enclosed ghetto guarded on the outside. The ghetto was in the shape of an “L” and was located around the Franciszkańska Square, on Franciszkańska and Spółdzielcza streets. There were two entrances to the ghetto: on Sienkiewicza Street and near the Franciscan Church. Between 300 and 600 Jews inhabited the ghetto, and Moshe Kleiner was appointed the new head of the Krosno Judenrat. 
According to a report by the Krosno Jewish community dated November 8, 1942, there were 950 Jews in the Krosno area, who performed forced labor in German factories or quarries.   
The Krosno ghetto was liquidated on December 4, 1942 (on a Friday, the first day of Hanukkah). Members of the Security Police, Order Police, and Waffen-SS, as well as Polish and Ukrainian auxiliary police surrounded the town. The Germans ordered the remaining Jews (about 300) to assemble at Franciszkańska Square. The entire population of the ghetto, with the exception of 25 people, was sent to the Rzeszów ghetto. The area of the ghetto was searched thoroughly, and any Jew found in hiding was shot on the spot. 
In the years from 1942 to 1944, the Germans shot a number of Jews who were caught in the Krosno region. In the spring of 1942, the Germans shot six Jews, including four children. Jews captured after the liquidation of the ghetto, were shot inside the synagogue. Around March 1943, seven children were shot on the street, and their parents were burned alive in one of the former Jewish houses. In 1943, between 100 and 120 Jews from Krosno and its vicinity were shot by the Germans at the Jewish cemetery on Zawodzie Street. Some Poles, such as the priest Jan Zawrzecki, helped Jews by providing them with places to hide. 
Sources:
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Krosno can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/2832); BA-L (B 162/14505); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124, reels 31 and 32, RG-15.019M; RG-50.002*0047; RG-50.042*0017; RG-02.056; Acc.2002.335.1), VHF (# 1559, 4113, 4364, 9987, 12530, 12730, 12852, 19762, 20714, 22642, 28197, 28463, 28534, 29310, 30456, 33925, 37309, 38152, 38834, 43099, 44867, 45836, 46267, 48091, 50973, and 51382); and YVA.
Publications dealing with the history and murder of the Jews in Krosno include the following: “Krosno,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984); “Krosno” in Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Wydawnictwo Libra, 2004); Elżbieta Rączy, Ludność żydowska w Krośnie 1939-1946 (Krosno: Muzeum Rzemiosła w Krośnie, 1999); Jakob Breitowicz, Through Hell to Life (New York: Shengold Publishers, 1983); and Alexander B. White, Be a Mensch: A Legacy of the Holocaust (Scottsdale, AZ: A.B. White, 2004).
Joanna Sliwa
Łańcut
Pre-1939: Łańcut, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Landshut, Kreis Jaroslau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Łańcut, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Łańcut is located 35 kilometers (21.5 miles) west of Jarosław. There were 2,753 Jewish residents in Łańcut in 1921, constituting 30 percent of the total population.
On September 22, 1939, the German authorities occupying Łańcut ordered all Jews to leave the town in the direction of Jarosław and cross the San River, which they presumed would serve as the new German-Soviet border, after the latter’s attack on Poland on September 17. The expulsion was to be implemented on the following day. On September 24, 1939, the Germans combed the neighborhoods in search of those who had stayed behind, loading them onto trucks with no luggage, and driving them across to the other bank of the San. However, some of the Jews, who had left on their own initiative, settled along the way in nearby villages, hoping to be able to return to Łańcut.  
In the first days of October 1939, the Germans announced that those Jews remaining could stay in Łańcut, on condition that they register with the authorities. According to a survivor, R.L., they were allowed to remain in their own houses, but forbidden to leave Łańcut, which meant that effectively a form of open ghetto was established, bounded by the town’s limits. R.L. does not state exactly when the movement of Łańcut’s Jews was restricted in this way.  The historian, Czesław Pilichowski, states that the Germans established a ghetto at the end of 1939. According to Sefer Lantsut, however, this probably occurred much later, when all the remaining communities in the Kreis were ghettoized. According to this source, the head of Kreis Jaroslau, Georg Eisenlohr, issued an order on December 18, 1941, forbidding the Jews from leaving their places of domicile on pain of death. “Domicile” was defined as an urban or village community, a village, or lodging place. The order went into effect on January 1, 1942.
In October or November 1939, the Germans designated Marcus Pohorille to serve as the chairman of the Jewish council (Judenrat). His staff included: Luzer Marder, Shlomo Greenbaum, Leizer Fass, Wolf Gutman, Moshe Sigel, David Rosenblum, Hayyim Leib Kornblau, Isaac Weinbach, and Israel Gersten. Rachel Sapir was the Judenrat secretary. 
The Judenrat summoned one person from each Jewish family once a week for forced labor – primarily cleaning assignments. There was no soup kitchen, but each of the wealthier families had to provide for at least one poor person two days a week. Subsequently, there were only a few sporadic cases of typhus and dysentery. 
Some of the Jewish houses in Łańcut were torn down to create a ‘Planty’ (small recreational area with trees). In the winter of 1939-1940, the Jews were ordered to wear armbands with a Star of David emblem. They were excluded from economic life; accordingly, all 150 Jewish-owned shops were closed, and by January 1940, their remaining property had to be registered. 
Early in 1940, the Germans ordered all Jews performing forced labor to be registered. Of the total of 900 Jewish residents at the time, at least half were newcomers, most of them having been expelled from the western parts of Poland incorporated into the Reich. Of that number, 157 were between the ages of 14 and 60 (i.e. 17.4 percent) and were obliged to report for forced labor. The majority of the deportees were from Łódź, Kalisz, and also some from Piotrków Trybunalski inside the Generalgouvernement. 
The Jewish Social-Self Help (JSS) committee for Kreis Jaroslau was established in Łańcut at the end of 1940, rather than in the Kreis center of Jarosław, in which very few Jews remained after similar expulsions in late September 1939. The JSS committee included two Judenrat members: M. Pohorille and L. Fass, as well as Shmelke Westreich of Kańczuga. In December 1940, the JSS estimated 6,000 Jews were left in the Kreis, of which the largest community was in Łańcut, amounting to 1,300 people (including 400 deportees). 
After the Germans attacked the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, a significant number of Łańcut Jews that had been expelled into Eastern Galicia returned. These people were forced to register and pay 100 złoty.
Diana Greenbaum, the daughter of one of the Judenrat members who returned to Łańcut from Lwów in January 1942, testified that, on the whole, the community lived in peace at that time, and somehow managed their lives. It was even still possible to get meat from a ritual slaughterer. 
At the end of 1941, Łańcut’s mayor Bernard Bonnek started to persecute those Jewish returnees who had lived under Soviet occupation and had not registered upon their return to Łańcut. Suspecting that many of them had collaborated with the Soviets, the mayor had 20 of them arrested, and interrogated for alleged membership in the Communist Party or for being commissars; this group was later released and sent to work. Of another group of 24 returnees who were arrested, 23 were shot at the Jewish cemetery after only a few months in captivity.
Another major round of arrests of several dozen Poles and Jews was conducted on March 20-23, 1942 (or possibly in February 1942). At the same time, the Judenrat was summoned to the Gestapo; only Greenbaum, Marder, and Weinbach showed up, while the other members hid. These three were arrested along with six Jews that had been randomly picked up after the Judenrat members refused to select ten hostages. Six of those arrested were reportedly shot in the prison courtyard, and the remainder was executed in July 1942. The resultant panic that arose among the returnees caused many to register with the authorities. 
Gestapo officials from Jarosław carried out most of the executions. N. Dzibulski, N. Kritzinger, and N. Kirschner are reported as having taken part in several of them. The most feared, Kokut, a member of the Łańcut German Gendarmerie, was discovered in 1957 in Czechoslovakia and extradited to Poland, where he was sentenced to death.
The new Judenrat was chaired by a lawyer, Rubin Nadel, and included, Moshe Siegel, Joel Perlmutter, Mottel Kern, David Rosenblum, Hayyim Leib Kornblau, and Israel Milrad. Naphtali Reich was its secretary. According to Diana Greenbaum, the new Judenrat was made up of young people, who “had no esteem in the town,” and “didn’t enjoy high regard” among the Jews. The Judenrat imposed various charges on the Jews and when the Germans ordered it to collect allegedly overdue taxes in July 1942, this was conducted “in a relentless manner.” 
From early in 1942, all Jewish men were forced to work. As news arrived of the resettlement of Jews from other towns, most people tried to secure work in road construction or in German enterprises, as such employment appeared to offer the best safeguard against being deported. 
On July 15, 1942, the Gestapo ordered all of Łańcut’s Jews to gather at the playing field of a local high school (gymnazium) in order to have their ID cards (Kennkarten) stamped. Only those with stamped IDs were allegedly to be spared from the resettlement, which was set for August 1, 1942. The Gestapo chief in Jarosław, Schmidt, chaired this special commission. In the end, the stamps did not make any difference. Some of those who attempted to escape to the countryside during this period were caught and shot. 
Jews still living in the countryside around Łańcut appear only to have been brought into the town at the last minute. For example, according to Józef Leichter, a Judenrat messenger only informed the Jewish population in Medynia Głogowska one night in advance that they would have to evacuate to the Łańcut ghetto on the following morning, August 1, 1942. Some Jews from that village were ordered to move to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
On the day of the Łańcut ghetto’s liquidation (August 1, 1942), all its Jewish residents were transferred either by horse and buggy or on foot to a transit camp in Pełkinie (14 kilometers (9 miles) away). The Germans selected this former Soviet POW camp as the place to concentrate the Jews of the Kreis. From there, the elderly were taken to a nearby forest and shot; the others were loaded onto trains and sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. The young and able were dispatched to various labor camps.
A group of approximately 60 young people and the members of the Judenrat were sent back to Łańcut for work. They were able to move back into their apartments and help those who had survived the expulsion by hiding in Łańcut. They were then transferred to the Sieniawa ghetto, on September 17, 1942. The Sieniawa ghetto existed until May 4, 1943. Most of its residents worked in labor camps in forestry. 
Georg Eisenlohr, the Kreishauptmann in Jarosław was extradited in 1947 to Poland by the French authorities and sentenced in 1948 to 5 years in prison by the court in Kraków. He died in prison on March 27, 1951. 
Sources:
The following publications were used to prepare this entry: Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 287; Martin Gilbert, Holocaust Journey: Traveling in Search of the Past (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), p. 203; and N. Kudish and M. Walzer-Fass, eds., Sefer Lantsut (Tel Aviv: Irgune yots’e Lantsut be-Yiśrael uve-Artsot ha-Berit, 1963.), pp. XXXIV-XXXIX.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/657 (JSS); 301/840, 301/891, 301/1501, 301/2745, 301/4939 (Relacje)); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M (ASG)); and YVA.
Jolanta Kraemer
Lesko
Pre-1939: Lesko (Yidddish: Linsk), town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Kreis Sanok, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Lesko is located about 208 kilometers (130 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. The 1921 census reported 2,338 Jewish residents, constituting 61.4 percent of the population. 
In the first days of September 1939, Lesko received large numbers of refugees fleeing eastwards, away from the advancing German troops. Amongst the newcomers there were 200 to 300 Jewish deserters from the Polish army. According to Leon Finver, a survivor, the local youth set up a self-defense group whose goal was to obtain civilian clothes for these deserters in order to prevent the Germans from sending them to prisoner-of-war camps upon their capture of the town, which occurred on September 10, 1939. During the ensuing short-lived German occupation, Jews were apprehended for cleaning jobs. 
In accordance with the Ribbentrop-Molotow Pact, Lesko became a border town with German and Russian guards on opposite ends of the bridge over the San River. Most of the Jews found life at least bearable under Soviet rule.
The situation changed radically at the end of June 1941, when the Germans recaptured Lesko, following their invasion of the Soviet Union. A Ukrainian militia and a prison to hold short-term male arrestees were soon established. By October 1941, the Sanok Kreishauptmann had taken over the administration of Lesko, as it became incorporated into Distrikt Krakau. From the very beginning of the occupation, the Germans seized religious Jews and shaved off their beards. They sporadically shot people in the streets for no reason. According to the testimony of survivor Renee Stern, unlike in other parts of the Generalgouvernment, the Jews of Lesko were not required to wear armbands with the Star of David, or at least this regulation was not enforced in Lesko. 
The new German administration ordered the establishment of a Jewish council (Judenrat) with a notary named Teich as its chairman. According to Jaffa Wallach, the Judenrat mainly looked out for its own interests, more than those of the entire community. Its tasks included the collection of contributions imposed by the Germans. 
A Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) committee independent of the Judenrat was established in Lesko following the German occupation. By August 1941, the soup kitchen was serving 400 meals daily. It closed within a month, however, and when it reopened in mid-October, it was only able to distribute 200 bowls of soup per day. To help as many of the needy as possible, the JSS only issued meals to individuals on alternate days. The kitchen was financed by the Kraków central office of the JSS, donations from local Jews, and by the Judenrat. By November 1941, there were 2,260 Jews living in Lesko (684 families). At that time, the Judenrat was reporting cases of people swelling up from hunger. The only Jewish shop operating sold stationery. Dr. Nathan Wallach attended Lesko’s sick. 
There is no information on Jews performing forced labor in the town; however, registrations of men aged 18 to 50 were conducted at the town hall and a number were conscripted in order to build labor camps in the vicinity. According to one source, there were also roundups of young males, who were never heard from again. 
As of December 12, 1941, the Sanok Kreishauptmann restricted the residency of Jews in the Kreis to those who were registered prior to June 22, 1941. All those who had arrived after that date were ordered to leave the Kreis. There is no information on how this impacted the population of Lesko; however, by April 1942, the number of Jews had changed very little, i.e., to 2,300. 
A ghetto was established in Lesko in the spring of 1942 and an estimated 200 Jews were shot during the ghetto’s existence. Renee Stern, whose family had to leave their market square lodging, said that Jews were being transferred “in bunches” to the town’s outskirts. Residents were forbidden to leave the ghetto, but there is no information as to whether it was closed or guarded. Peasants who were free to move around often came to the ghetto to sell or barter food. There were cases of contagious diseases. In 1942, the Judenrat reported spending a significant amount of its funds on burials (700 złoty monthly, as compared with 150 to 250 złoty per month in 1941). 
When welfare donations dried up in May 1942, the Judenrat imposed forced contributions. The stationery shop remained open, and a second Jewish shop – a grocery – had just received permission to operate. Nine workshops were still open (two barbers, four tailors, two tinsmiths, and a haberdasher). The Judenrat reported that the remainder of Lesko’s Jews lived by selling their belongings or from welfare support. Despite the poverty, the soup kitchen continued serving meals. A daycare center for 46 children aged 4 to 15 had opened by July 1942, serving three meals per day. 
A large-scale transfer of Jews to Lesko from throughout Kreis Sanok began in June 1942, e.g. those from nearby Cisna (31 kilometers (19 miles) south of Lesko) were expelled to Lesko on June 20, 1942. The transfer was unannounced and conducted by German and Ukrainian police units. Cisna’s Jews were marched to Lesko-Łukawica, where the newcomers were forced to surrender any money exceeding 20 złoty, which was then handed over to the Lesko Judenrat. 
By mid-July 1942, the Judenrat reported that 365 expellees had arrived, whereas in total some 1,600 new arrivals from the entire Kreis were expected. Regarding the Jewish communities that were transferred to Lesko, only a few locations are known, including: Wola Michowa, Baligród (15 kilometers (9 miles) south of Lesko), and Kalnica (or Kalica). The Judenrat supervised the accommodation of the newcomers. A carpentry workshop was opened to make bunk beds, chairs, and tables for them. The soup kitchen was expanded, serving almost 900 meals per day. 
On September 4, 1942, the Sanok Kreishauptmann, Dr. Class, announced that the deportation of all the Jews of the Kreis would commence the next day, and warned the non-Jewish population that any assistance rendered to the Jews would be punishable by death. 
According to Jaffa Wallach, all Jews – with the exception of the Jewish doctor – were “imprisoned in their own houses” prior to the deportation. On September 6, 1942, the ghetto residents were free to go out until nightfall when they were to return and be ready for their departure to the Zasław labor camp 6 kilometers (4 miles) northeast of Lesko, where they were to work in a paper factory. Following a selection, approximately 100 elderly and disabled Jews were shot at the Jewish cemetery in Lesko.  
Sources agree that the ghetto liquidation took place at night and that the ghetto’s residents were marched to Zasław; however, some date it on August 14, 1942 – before the Kreishauptmann’s deportation order.  According to the Encyclopedia of Jewish Life, Lesko’s Jews made a mass pilgrimage to the local cemetery before leaving for Zasław. 
On arrival at the camp barracks in Zasław, the Lesko Jews found them already overcrowded with Jews brought there from other localities, so they were forced to remain outside. They did not receive any food and there was no work waiting for them. Over the next few days, a deportation transport of 4,000 Jews, including women and children, was sent from Zasław to the Bełżec extermination camp. This was followed by the shooting of elderly Jews in a nearby forest and then more transports to Bełżec, which continued until the camp’s liquidation in 1943. 
Sources:
The following sources include information on the ghetto in Lesko: Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich and Muzeum Regionalne PTTK w Brzozowie, 1993), p. 38; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: Główna Komisja, 1979), p. 266; Jerzy Tomaszewski and Andrzej Żbikowski, eds., Żydzi w Polsce. Dzieje i kultura. Leksykon (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Cyklady, 2001), p. 252.
The following archival sources were used in preparing this entry: AŻIH (211/636 and 301/280); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 32 (Lesko)); and VHF (# 10770-2, # 11086-1, # 15248-9, # 16875, # 25239-3, and # 32066).
Jolanta Kraemer
Leżajsk 
Pre-1939: Leżajsk (Yiddish: Lizhensk), town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Lezajsk, Kreis Jaroslau (Jarosław), Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Leżajsk, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Leżajsk is located about 200 kilometers (125 miles) east-northeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, there were around 2,500 Jews residing in Leżajsk.
Following the outbreak of war in September 1939, many Jews fled eastwards from Leżajsk, into what was soon to become Soviet-occupied territory, by crossing the San River. The Germans occupied Leżajsk on September 10, 1939. On that same day the Germans set the synagogue on fire. They plundered Jewish property and abused mainly the Orthodox Jews. At the end of September 1939, the Germans expelled most of the Jews to the Soviet occupation zone. Only about 350 Jews, who had hidden in nearby villages, returned to live in the town. A local ethnic German, Nelis, was appointed as mayor of Leżajsk. 
At the end of 1939 or in January 1940, the German authorities established an “open ghetto” in Leżajsk, in an area that had also been inhabited by Jews before the war. The Germans concentrated some 40 Jewish families from Leżajsk and an unknown number of resettled Jews into a “Jewish quarter,” on Bożnicza Street, where the synagogue had once stood. Poles and Germans took over the vacant Jewish dwellings. According to a report prepared by the Leżajsk branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) in May 1942, there were 105 small wooden houses and 27 brick houses in the Jewish quarter. The Jews were allowed to leave the area between 8:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. to purchase food. Conversations among Jews in the ghetto were concerned mainly with food and the bleak outlook for the future. Education and religious practice were forbidden by the Germans, but Yosel Melamed taught the children to keep them occupied, and some Jews worshipped secretly and observed the Sabbath. In 1940, the Jews were also required to wear white armbands bearing a blue Star of David. 
A Jewish council (Judenrat) was formed headed by Feivel Wagner, Shmuel Ozer, and Leibel Katz. It was entrusted with providing laborers for the Germans who performed work such as digging up matzevot (Jewish tombstones) for paving roads. Jewish women worked mainly as maids in German homes. In November 1940, the Judenrat planned to open a community kitchen for the impoverished Jews of Leżajsk, which would distribute around 200 meals a day. The Judenrat wrote to the JSS in Kraków requesting assistance with the provision of food supplies. 
In 1941, the Germans enclosed the Leżajsk ghetto. Now Jews could leave the ghetto only with a special permit and only for labor. Jews caught outside the ghetto without a permit were imprisoned in the local jail; six Jews were executed in the jail yard. According to the Leżajsk branch of the JSS, there were about 1,000 Jews in the town as of April 1, 1942. The inhabitants of the Leżajsk ghetto consisted of the Jewish population of Leżajsk and the surrounding area who had evaded the Nazi deportation into the Soviet Union, and more than 100 resettled Jews from Kalisz (arrived in 1939), Kraków (resettled in 1940), and Germany (deported in 1938). 
The anti-Jewish Aktions conducted by the Germans intensified. In 1942 (the exact date is unknown), members of the Gestapo and Order Police shot a number of Jews at the Jewish cemetery in Leżajsk. The details of the Aktion are unclear, since the arrests and shooting of the Jews took place at night. Soon afterwards, a group of Jews was sent to an unknown destination. On June 23, 1942, the Germans shot 8 Jews who were being transported to Sieniawa. On July 15, 1942, the Germans shot 16 Jews in the town’s square, and executed 20 Jews in Jelna. 
At the end of July and beginning of August 1942, German Police forces liquidated the Leżajsk ghetto. Thirty-nine Jews were taken to the village of Wierzawice and shot. The remaining Jews were taken to a temporary camp in Pełkinie, about 20 kilometers (12.4 miles) to the southeast, and after brutal treatment, they were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp. Several families and individual Jews were hidden by their Christian acquaintances. Some survived with the aid of Aryan papers provided by Marian Kozyra, which enabled them to register for work in Germany. Others fled to the forests in the hope of surviving there. The Germans conducted thorough searches of the Leżajsk area for hidden Jews, right up to the end of the occupation. 
On February 18, 1945, a unit of the National Military Organization “Wołyniak” attacked three Jewish homes and a building of the NKVD, killing a number of Jews. The few survivors emigrated mainly to Israel and the United States. The Jewish community of Leżajsk was not reconstituted after the war, but Jews from all over the world come to Leżajsk on Adar 21, the anniversary of tzaddik Elimelech Weisblum’s death (Yohrzeit). The ohel (a structure built over the resting place of a tzaddik destroyed by the Germans in 1940) was restored in 1963 thanks to the efforts of Boruh Sefir, who survived the war in a Soviet camp; and Kazimierz Gdula and Rabbi Friedman, who, while imprisoned at Dachau concentration camp, promised each other to rebuild the ohel if they survived. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Leżajsk include the following: “Leżajsk,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 232-236; Chaim Rabin, ed., Lizhensk; sefer zikaron le-kedoshei Lizhensk she-nispu be-shoat ha-natsim (Tel Aviv: Former Residents of Leżajsk in Israel, 1970); “Leżajsk” in Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Wydawnictwo Libra, 2004); Stanisław Kłos, Leżajsk i powiat leżajski (Krosno: Roksana, 1999).
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/638); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 32; RG-15.019M (ASG), reels 10 and 17); VHF (# 7685 and # 47446); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Limanowa
Pre-1939: Limanowa, town and powiat center, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Ilmenau, Kreis Neu-Sandez, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Limanowa, town and powiat center, województwo małopolskie, Poland
The town of Limanowa is located in 74 kilometers (46 miles) southeast of Kraków. According to the 1931 census, 1,002 Jews were living in Limanowa.
German forces occupied Limanowa on September 10, 1939. Shortly after their arrival, the Germans started to persecute the Jewish population; they arrested six Jews and took them to the nearby village of Stara Wieś, where they killed them. 
On the official establishment of the Generalgouvernement on October 26, 1939, Limanowa became part of Kreis Neu Sandez (Nowy Sącz) in Distrikt Krakau. The Kreishauptmann in Nowy Sącz was Dr. Reinhard Busch. The Aktions against the Jewish population in the Kreis were organized and carried out by the Grenzpolizeikommissariat (Border Police Office, GPK) in Neu Sandez, subordinated to the Commanding Officer of the Security Police (KdS) in Kraków. SS-Obersturmführer Heinrich Hamann, one of the cruelest and most bloodthirsty SS officers in the region, was in charge of the Neu Sandez GPK (also known simply as the Gestapo) from 1940 to 1943. In implementing the various anti-Jewish measures and Aktions, the Security Police was assisted by the German Gendarmerie and the Polish (Blue) Police in Limanowa.
In the fall of 1939 and the spring of 1940, a large number of refugees came to Limanowa from other towns in Poland. In March 1940, 500 refugees from the city of Łódź were confined within a refugee camp in Limanowa. This camp was, however, soon closed down without warning in mid-April. The refugees were sent to Nowy Sącz, Grybów, and Mszana Dolna, which alongside Limanowa, from the fall of 1940 and during 1941 became collecting centers for all the Jews forced out of the smaller towns and villages in the area. 
In the fall of 1940, there were 895 Jews in Limanowa, including 95 refugees. In September 1940, a public kitchen coordinated by the local Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in Limanowa in order to alleviate the growing needs of the local population.  By the summer of 1941, all the Jews from the surrounding villages had been concentrated in the town and the population had swelled to over 1,000 residents. At the end of December 1941, the Germans conducted a “Fur Aktion” in Limanowa, and imposed a large monetary contribution on the Jewish population.  In April 1942, Limanowa counted a population of 1,402 Jews, including 602 refugees. 
In April 1942, the head of the GPK Hamann in Nowy Sącz received instructions from KdS Kraków to arrest and shoot all Jews in the Kreis known to be communists or to sympathize with them. In response, Hamann obtained an old membership list for the Poalei Zion (left-wing Zionist) movement and ordered that all those on the list be arrested with the assistance of the Jewish councils and Jewish Police. When the head of the Judenrat in Limanowa Sola Shnitzer refused to obey this order, Hamann traveled personally to Limanowa. On April 20, 1942, Hamann arrested Shnitzer together with the other members of the Judenrat. They were taken to a barn not far from the office of the Judenrat, where, under Hamann’s supervision, three SS-men shot them. The members of Poalei Zion in Limanowa were then arrested and shot shortly afterwards.
On June 4, 1942, the Germans established an enclosed ghetto in the town. The ghetto was located in the so-called Kamieniec area along the Mordarka Stream.  Between July 10, and July 16, 1942, more than 50 Jews from the ghetto were murdered by the Gestapo from Nowy Sącz and members of the local Gendarmerie post in Limanowa. In particular, Hamann directed the shooting of 33 people on July 16, 1942, with the aim of inducing the Jews in the ghetto to pay a contribution consisting of 75,000 złoty, several meters of fabric, 50 liters (13.2 gallons) of spirits, and 50 kilograms (110.2 pounds) of canned food.  Another contribution was requested at the beginning of August 1942, when similar contributions were demanded from the Jews in Nowy Sącz, Stary Sącz, Grybów, and Mszana Dolna. 
On August 16, 1942, the Gestapo office in Nowy Sącz began the evacuation of the Jews from the ghettos of Limanowa, Stary Sącz, Grybów, and Mszana Dolna to the two ghettos in Nowy Sącz. The ghetto in Limanowa was liquidated on August 18, 1942.  One day prior to this, Poles conscripted into the Baudienst (construction service) were ordered to excavate a mass grave in the forest about 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) south of town on the road to nearby Stara Wieś. 
All the Jews were forced to assemble in the marketplace; they were allowed to bring with them only 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage.  Among those assembled in the market place were 50 Jews who were already in a special work detachment (Arbeitskommando), employed as workers for the Vianowa construction company. Another 50 workers were then selected by Hamann for this detachment to fulfill the quota of 100; after the selection, the group was forced to surrender all valuables and marched to a labor camp in nearby Sowliny.  Around 200 people, mostly the sick and the elderly, were selected and taken to the mass grave close to Stara Wieś and shot on the spot by members of the Gestapo and the SS.  The Germans forced all of the others, about 800 people, to walk to the ghettos in Nowy Sącz, some 26 kilometers (16 miles) away.  At the end of August 1942, the occupiers deported almost all the Jews in the Nowy Sącz ghettos to the extermination camp in Bełżec.
After the liquidation of the ghetto, the Julag (Jewish workers camp) at Sowliny to the north of the town continued to exist until November 1942. An additional 80 Jews were sent there from Mszana Dolna. On November 5, 1942, on Hamann’s orders, Fechner from the Gestapo in Nowy Sącz assisted by local Gendarmerie officials under the command of Lieutenant Georg Urban escorted the remaining Jews of this camp (about 150 people) to a forest near Tymbark, to the west of Limanowa, where they were shot. 
Once the ghetto had been cleared, the houses in the area of the former ghetto were occupied by local Poles. The Germans arranged for the sorting of remaining Jewish property and the less valuable items were auctioned off to local inhabitants. 
Sources:
Information on the fate of the Jewish population of Limanowa during the Holocaust can be found in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 235-236; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 268; and Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 1979), vol. 24, Lfd. Nr. 635, pp. 269-484 (LG-Bo 16 Ks 1/65, verdict against Heinrich Hamann and others).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community of Limanowa can be found in these archives: AŻIH (301/1203 and 1703); IPN; USHMM, (RG.15.019M (ASG), reels 4 and 14-15; and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 32, 211/693); VHF; and YVA.
Caterina Crisci
Miechów
Pre-1939: Miechów, town and powiat center, Kielce województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Miechow, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Miechów, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Miechów is located about 38 kilometers (24 miles) north of Kraków. In 1939, on the eve of war, the Jewish population was about 2,500 (out of a total of 6,700).
At the time of the German invasion on September 1, 1939, a large number of refugees, Jewish and non-Jewish, arrived in Miechów from towns and cities near the German-Polish border. The Germans arrived on September 3, and food supplies became short as the Germans took the best for themselves.  Soon the German army and SS were abusing the Jews, and they burned down the synagogue. 
In the fall of 1939, the leadership of the Jewish community was reconstituted as a Jewish council (Judenrat), which was chaired by Hirsch Edelist. Its principal responsibility was to supply workers for forced labor. A six-man unit of Jewish Police assisted in enforcing German demands. In December the Judenrat was ordered to compel every Jew aged 15 or older to wear a white armband with a Star of David. The Judenrat, which controlled the supply of material for the armbands, manufactured and sold them to people. 
A few Jews who had escaped to the Soviet part of divided Poland slipped across the border for visits and reported on the relatively tolerant treatment of Jews on the Soviet side. This prompted a small number of young people to cross the San River and try their luck under the Soviets. During the period between the division of Poland in 1939 and the German invasion of the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, there was a reliable postal service across the border. The winter of 1939-1940 passed without major disruption. However, Jews were under constant threat of being kidnapped for forced labor, such as shoveling snow. An 8:00 P.M. until dawn curfew was imposed on the Jewish population. 
In April 1940, German soldiers surrounded the town and forced the Jews and some non-Jews to assemble at the Miechów municipality. The Germans instigated a riot, breaking into Jewish homes, smashing furnishings, attacking the men, and raping some women. Towards evening they lit bonfires and forced the Jews to burn holy books and religious articles while singing and dancing around the fires.
In the spring of 1940, a German firm, Jaeger, arrived to take charge of repaving the Kraków-Miechów-Warsaw highway. The Judenrat was ordered to provide a substantial workforce as quickly as possible. Well-to-do members of the community bribed their way out of the labor gangs (10 złoty per day, paid to the Judenrat) and were replaced by poorer people. In many cases the meager food allowance the workers received was a lifesaver. There were, however, protests against such favoritism by some youths, who were repeatedly pressed into forced labor. Other parties were used to redirect the river channel at the edge of town, or for road maintenance. 
From the start of the occupation until July 1940, Miechów’s total population increased from 6,700 to 9,860, mainly due to the influx of Jewish refugees. Another 1,000 Jews who were expelled from Kraków arrived during the summer of 1940. From time to time, the local authorities forced people, mainly Jews, to leave the town to relieve the overcrowding. The Judenrat took on the responsibility for health and sanitation, assistance to the needy, education, and other functions. Some of the Kraków refugees were sick with typhus and everyone in Miechów was inoculated. The Judenrat also opened a bathhouse and ordered everyone to bathe there on a weekly basis. Members of the sanitation service entered houses to inspect for cleanliness and to fumigate clothing. In June 1940, 120 poor people received one warm meal a day. By March 1941, the public soup kitchen was serving 300 meals a day for a token payment. A women’s committee tended to the nourishment of 150 children and ran a kindergarten in the Judenrat building. A local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization in Kraków was also active in Miechów, although it did not always see eye to eye with the Judenrat. 
According to the JSS records for Miechów, in March 1941 the Jews were ordered to move to about 10designated streets in the south of town around the synagogue, which became a “partially enclosed” ghetto. The ghetto area contained 350 houses, which had to accommodate more than 2,000 people.  The German authorities gave the Jews only a few hours to move in, taking only what they could carry with them. Two or three families were forced to share one room. The few Christians who lived there were moved into abandoned Jewish houses. Subsequently the Judenrat was instructed to build a five-meter-high (16.4 feet) wall topped with barbed wire, at its own expense, around the ghetto. Entry and exit required a permit from the German authorities. However, the guards could be bribed, and local farmers exchanged produce for work done by tailors and shoemakers in the ghetto, so that Jews could supplement their inadequate rations. At the start there were probably around 2,500 inhabitants in the ghetto. 
In 1941 and 1942, additional Jews arrived from surrounding towns, as well as some deportees from Austria and Germany. Due to the overcrowded conditions about 300 refugees were moved from Miechów to Działoszyce. During the winter of 1941-1942, the oppressive conditions and hunger grew worse. By February 1942, the JSS was assisting 450 needy people and the public soup kitchen had to increase the number of daily meals. Despite the ban on movement in and out of the ghetto, ways were found to acquire food. Until the spring of 1942, the Jews of Miechów were able to send food packages to relatives in other towns. By 1942, Jews caught outside the ghetto would be shot on sight. 
One day at the end of June 1942, the Jews were locked inside the ghetto. Fifty young men were taken to the Great Synagogue and held for 24 hours. On the next day they were taken to Bonarka, near Kraków, and put to work in the brick factory. For a while they were able to steal away from the work camp for an occasional Sunday visit in Miechów. 
On August 28, 1942, the Security Police post (KdS Aussenstelle) in Miechów took 600 sick and elderly Jews to Słominiki, where they joined thousands of others from the region. They were held without food or water, under heavy guard, in a swampy field on the banks of the Szereniawa River. After a week, at the beginning of September, a “selection” took place. Several hundred Jews were taken to open pits and killed on the spot. Jews deemed fit for work, were sent to labor camps, while the rest were loaded onto freight trains and taken to the extermination camp at Bełżec. On September 4, 1942, the great Aktion took place in Miechów. German police units and auxiliary forces surrounded the ghetto and chased the inhabitants into a field near the train station, where thousands of Jews from Działoszyce, Proszowice, Skalbmierz, and other nearby towns were waiting. Many who evaded the roundup were hunted down and shot. The Germans “selected” 800 to 900 young men for the labor camps at Prokocim and Plaszów. The rest were put into freight cars “sanitized” with a dusting of lime and transported to Bełżec. About 50 Jews were kept back to clean up the ghetto and sort the possessions that were left behind. During the following weeks, they were joined by some 200 others who had escaped deportation, or fled the labor camps to seek refuge in Miechów. Some were former inhabitants, others from smaller towns in the area. 
At the beginning of November 1942, the German command ordered the complete “cleansing” of Kreis Miechow. In mid-November, the deputy Kreishauptmann in Miechów, Dr. Friedrich Schmidt, assisted by some local Poles, SS forces, German Gendarmerie, men of the civil administration, and the Jewish Police, captured about 600 surviving Jews from throughout the Kreis (including the last few dozen Jews left after the deportation from nearby Koszyce, where no formal ghetto had been established) and murdered them in the Chodówka Forest. Their bodies were thrown into pits dug by local farmers. Some who had hidden in the forest emerged from their hiding places and they too were caught and shot to death. On January 15, 1943, the Germans burst into the ghetto and finished off the remaining 32 Jews (comprised mainly of the Judenrat and Jewish Police). These victims were thrown into a common grave at the Jewish cemetery. 
Despite these Aktions about 20 Jews managed to escape. Most of them survived in hiding for the rest of the war. On January 16, 1945, the Red Army drove the Germans from Miechów. 
Sources:
Articles on the destruction of the Jewish population of the town can be found in the following publications: Nachman Blumental and Aviva Ben-Azar (Broshy), eds., Sefer yizkor Miechow, Charsznica, Ksiaz (Tel Aviv: Former Residents of Miechov, Charshnitza and Kshoynzh, 1971); Abraham Wein, Bracha Freundlich, and Wila Orbach, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 7, Lublin and Kielce (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1999), pp. 300-305. The personal memoir of William Eisen, Two Pounds of Sugar (Buffalo, N.Y.: William Eisen, 2003) includes a description of his life in the ghetto. The ghetto in Miechów is mentioned in Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), pp. 317-318.
Documentation on the fate of the Jews of Miechów during the Holocaust can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1739; and 211/680-694); BA-L (ZStL/II 206 AR-Z 40/62); ITS; USHMM (RG-15.019M, reel 14; RG-50.002*0063; and RG-50.155*0009); VHF (e.g., # 5821, 11791, 20139); and YVA.
Samuel Fishman
Niebylec 
Pre-1939: Niebylec (Yiddish: Nebilitz), village, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Reichshof, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Niebylec is located approximately 22 kilometers (16 miles) south of Rzeszów. An estimated 450 Jews were living in the Niebylec gmina on the eve of World War II. 
Following the German invasion in September, the German authorities had established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Niebylec by the end of 1939. In March 1940, Moses Pariser was its chairman.  The German Gendarmerie also operated a jail in the village.
In December 1939, 20 refugees from Kalisz and Łódź were sent via Rzeszów to Niebylec, bringing the number of Jews up to approximately 220. As all of them arrived with almost nothing, the Judenrat provided them with free housing (some families were housed in nearby Lutcza), as well as bread, potatoes, and milk. They also received a small amount of cash and firewood; their shoes were repaired at the Judenrat’s expense. A doctor was brought in to care for two that had fallen ill. One of them was a shochet, Dawid Reicher (or Rescher) who “suddenly lost his mind.” By May 1940, the town’s Jews had spent 3,000 złoty on the newcomers’ sustenance, but had received only 150 złoty in assistance from the Kraków branch of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC). 
In the spring of 1940, the Judenrat engaged in providing seeds for Jewish farmers holding small plots. Out of the approximately 50 farming families in the gmina, 17 were unable to fully sow their fields. The authorities threatened to expropriate them as “negligent” and put their farmland under Polish administration. Five of those families lived in Lutcza, four in Blizianka, three in Niebylec, two each in Baryczka and Jawornik, and one in Gwoźnica Górna. They owned a total of 49 morgi (1 morga is approximately 5,600 square meters or 6,698 square yards), but were able to sow only 32, leaving 17 to lie fallow. Pariser pleaded with the AJDC for financial help, as he feared that those farmers would be resettled to Niebylec, “and if that were to happen, a few more vagrant families would come in.” 
A JSS committee was later set up to aid the refugees. It acted under the Judenrat’s supervision and included Aron Uhes, Hersch Freund, and later, Israel Feldman. 
In August 1940, the Rzeszów Judenrat sent 10 new refugees from Kraków to Niebylec. Soon after, a much larger group of 40 expellees followed, bringing the number of newcomers to 64 by September 1940. This number of refugees remained stable until at least January 1941. 
In November 1940, the Judenrat was ordered to register Jews for forced labor; however, there is no information regarding the forced labor performed in Niebylec or its surroudnings. 
On December 17, 1941, the Reichshof Kreishauptmann, Heinz Ehaus, ordered the establishment of ghettos in the Kreis. In Rzeszów, the order was effective on January 10, 1942; whereas for the remainder of the Kreis on February 1, 1942. The Jewish residential area in Niebylec was most likely established as a ghetto shortly after this date. While not fenced, its inhabitants were allowed to leave it only with written permission. Laborers conscripted to work outside the ghetto were granted such permission.
Similar to other places in the region, the Jews living in the vicinity of Niebylec were ordered to move there in March 1942. An estimated 450 Jews were collected in the Niebylec ghetto during this period.
On April 14, 1942, the Gestapo shot seven ghetto residents. Of those executed, five names are known: Ida Brener (60 years old), Jankiel Fridrich (60), Szymon Mer (90), Józef Graz (45) and Mozes Schneiwas (70). All were buried in a mass grave at the Jewish cemetery.
In June 1942, the German authorities in Kraków issued an order for all the Jews of Kreis Reichshof to be concentrated in the Rzeszów ghetto for deportation, as Kreishauptmann Ehaus was eager to be the first to render his Kreis “judenrein” (cleansed of Jews) in Distrikt Krakau. As a result, in the second half of June, the Gendarmerie supervised the transfer of the Jews from all the other Kreis ghettos into the Rzeszów ghetto, such that some 22,000 Jews were concentrated there by the beginning of July 1942. 
The Niebylec ghetto was liquidated on June 25, 1942. Agents of the Sonderdienst killed three Jewish merchants during the transport to Rzeszów. Aron Blum and Aron Rain were buried in the village of Połomia; Szandla Rain in Baryczka. 
In Rzeszów, the Niebylec Jews shared the fate of others concentrated there and were sent in the course of the July 1942 deportations to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
In November 1943, the Gestapo shot 9 Jews and the 11 Poles, who had been sheltering them, in the neighboring village of Połomia.
Sources:
Brief descriptions and references on the ghetto in Niebylec are included in the following publications: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 114-115; Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 266-267; and Rejestr miejsc i faktów zbrodni popełnionych przez okupanta hitlerowskiego na ziemiach polskich w latach 1939-1945: województwo rzeszowskie (Warsaw: GKBZHwP, 1984), p. 123.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (210/509 (AJDC), 211/918 (JSS)); and USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC Niebylec)).
Jolanta Kraemer
Nowy Sącz 
Pre-1939: Nowy Sącz (Yiddish: Nay-Sants), city, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Neu-Sandez, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Nowy Sącz, city and powiat center, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Nowy Sącz is located about 80 kilometers (50 miles) southeast of Kraków. In 1939, the city’s population numbered about 35,000; of these approximately 12,000 were Jews.  
The German army occupied Nowy Sącz on September 6, 1939. The Germans suppressed all Jewish religious institutions, including the synagogues and religious schools, plundered Jewish homes, and required that Jewish males perform physically demanding labor. 
At the end of September 1939, SS-Obersturmführer Heinrich Hamann of the Security Police was appointed as deputy head of the Border Police office (Grenzpolizeikommissariat GPK) in Nowy Sącz (becoming its head in 1940).  In late September the German authorities ordered the establishment of a Jewish council (Judenrat); among its first tasks was to supply laborers to the Germans which to some extent stopped Jews from being seized from the streets. In November 1939, a number of Jewish refugees from Łódź, and Sieradz arrived and the Jewish council helped to integrate them into the community.  
In the spring of 1940, Yaakov Marin was officially appointed as head of the Jewish council; but in October 1940, on Hamann’s orders, he was sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp, and died there of pneumonia. In 1940, a Jewish police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was also established under Y. Folkman, to assist the Judenrat with its tasks. It was comprised mostly of social outcasts and soon earned a bad reputation for working closely with the German Police. 
Over the initial months of the occupation, the Germans imposed a series of anti-Jewish measures in the city. These included the marking of Jewish businesses and a ban on leaving the city without permission. Jewish lawyers were forbidden to practice and Jewish doctors could treat only Jewish patients. Many Jewish stores were “aryanized,” that is their inventory was seized or the businesses were placed under “trusteeship” by the German authorities.
By the summer of 1940, the Germans had established a labor camp at Lipie about 30 kilometers (19 miles) from Nowy Sącz and had sent several hundred Jewish laborers there. At Lipie the Jews lived and worked under harsh conditions, while constructing a new road. Another group of 300 Jews was sent from Nowy Sącz to work constructing a dam in Rożnów. Other Jews worked at sites around the city, assigned by the Labor Office (Arbeitsamt). A Jewish Block Dienst (separate from the Ordnungsdienst) assisted in rounding up Jews for forced labor quotas. The German police guarded the Jews, pursued them on the streets of the city, and sent them to labor camps. The Gestapo demanded money and other “contributions” from the Jewish community. Jewish houses were searched repeatedly for weapons and the officials conducting the searches frequently looted any items they fancied.
In the fall of 1940, all the Jews living close to the Slovak border were ordered to leave their homes and move to Nowy Sącz or its immediate vicinity. The Kreishauptmann in Nowy Sącz, Dr. Reinhard Busch, decreed that several spa towns in this area, including Krynica, Muszyna, and Piwniczna, had to be cleared of Jews by November 30. The Jewish council in Nowy Sącz had to find accommodation for these new refugees.
The number of Jews in the city increased, especially following the expulsion of thousands of Jews from Kraków in the spring of 1941. This increase in the Jewish population meant new challenges and burdens for the Jewish council. The Jewish hospital on Kraszewski Street was reopened, receiving financial support from Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) in Kraków.
In April 1941, the Jewish community of Nowy Sącz was fortunate to receive more than 6,000 kilograms (6.6 tons) of matzot in time for Passover. Part of this delivery was purchased by the Jewish Aid Committee in Slovakia and sent to Nowy Sącz on instructions from the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC). At this time 1,000 people were using the public kitchen that served hot meals. In the summer of 1941, some food aid was even received from Portugal, thanks to assistance from the First New Sandez Society in New York. 
In May 1941, the German authorities ordered that Jews, who were living in the villages and smaller towns in Kreis Neu-Sandez had to move to the larger towns, including Nowy Sącz. As a result, several hundred more refugees arrived, almost all in need of support.  Then in July 1941, following the German attack on the Soviet Union, the German authorities established two Jewish residential areas or ghettos in Nowy Sącz, in the northern part of the city where most Jews had lived for generations. The first was at Piekło, in the northeast, near the Kamienica River, and the second was in the area around Kazimierza Street (also known as Jewish Street). The latter area was smaller in size, but more densely populated. In July 1941, all Jews living outside these two demarcated areas were forced to move within them. The ghettos remained unfenced at first, but Jews required special permits to leave them. A total of about 12,000 Jews were forced to reside in the two ghettos. 
Extreme overcrowding was the norm. In some cases, four or five families (20 people) had to share a single apartment comprising one room and a kitchen. There was also terrible hunger. The weekly ration consisted of only 700 grams (24.7 ounces) of bread, 30 grams (1 ounce) of meat, and 20 grams (0.7 ounce) of sugar per person. Everyone had to obtain some extra food illegally or starve. In the cold winter of 1941-1942, the Jews had to chop up their furniture for firewood to keep warm, as they were ordered to surrender all fur items. Soon afterwards they were even ordered to surrender their remaining furniture.
In the late summer of 1941, the Border Police post (or Gestapo) launched a manhunt for rabbis and traditionally clothed Hasidim. Code named “Aktion Kaputan,” this resulted in the arrest of 10 individuals; who were all sent to Auschwitz. 
At the start of 1942, a typhus epidemic broke out in the ghettos. A health committee, comprising those with medical experience, strove to improve medical treatment and sanitary conditions. At first, the hospital did not charge for medical services, but later a small fee was collected and turned over to the Jewish council. The doctors made house calls and were permitted to go out after the curfew. The German authorities forbade the treatment of gunshot wounds, but the medical staff ignored this order. There were no Jewish surgeons in the ghetto. In the face of the growing danger of Aktions in the town, some Jews sought to hide in the hospital.
In the fall of 1941, the Gestapo targeted Jews who had fled to Soviet-controlled eastern Poland in the fall of 1939 and had subsequently returned to Nowy Sącz. They arrested about 30 Jews during this Aktion and murdered them. In January 1942, the Gestapo conducted a “cigarette Aktion” in the ghetto. On Hamann’s instructions, they raided the ghetto and arrested any Jews trading in cigarettes. Two groups comprising about 70 people altogether (including some children) were arrested as “black-marketeers” and shot in the old Jewish cemetery.
Officials of the Gestapo and German Order Police sometimes entered Jews’ apartments and arrested them with no explanation. They operated together with the Jewish Police, which also participated in many of the roundups. 
In the first half of 1942, a German named Hans Swoboda was in charge of Jewish affairs at the Arbeitsamt; he was responsible for sending groups of Jews to labor camps in the region, such as those at Rabka and Pustków. Some of those sent to these camps were murdered there or died from the harsh conditions. 
On April 28, 1942, Hamann conducted an Aktion against left-wing elements in the ghetto, especially Zionists. At 5:00 A.M., SS units surrounded the ghetto. On the basis of lists, the German and Jewish Police arrested about 150 people and brought them to the prison on Piarska Street. After one day and night in prison, they took the prisoners to the Jewish cemetery and shot them there. On the following night at least another 50 Jews were murdered as Hamann’s men shot people wildly in the ghetto. 
Rumors spread among the Jews that these Aktions were only the prelude to a larger deportation or killing Aktion. Ghetto residents tried to find work with German companies or the Wehrmacht, which might provide some security. Some Jews paid bribes to obtain these positions. Many of the skilled jobs were located in the area of the Piekła ghetto, which remained an open ghetto, although its area was reduced by a few streets in the summer of 1942. Here, there were workshops specialized in repair work and trades such as carpentry, broom making, and preparing furs. Among those places employing Jews outside the ghetto were a German Army barracks, various construction companies, a school for Luftwaffe officers, wood working companies in Nowajowa and Rytro, coal transportation at the railroad station, and the labor camp in Kurów. The workers employed by these enterprises received permits that appeared to protect them from deportation.
At some time in July 1942, the Germans enclosed the second ghetto in Kazimierza Street with a brick wall 2 meters (6.6 feet) high.  The preparation for the liquidation of the ghettos also began in July 1942. The sick and elderly were moved into the enclosed ghetto and Jews capable of work were registered once again. In August the Piekła ghetto was reduced in size, increasing overcrowding. Heavy taxes were demanded from all the Jews of the Kreis, just before the deportation Aktion. Then, between August 17 and August 20, Jews from the surrounding towns of Stary Sącz, Grybów, and Limanowa were transferred to the ghettos in Nowy Sącz, raising the number of Jews there to more than 16,000.  The SS and Police leader ordered that the sick and elderly were to be shot on the spot. Hamann was in charge of the Aktion leading to the deportation of the Jews.
During the clearing of the Jews from the surrounding towns, Hamann’s men shot many of the Jews on site, and in Mszana Dolna almost all the Jews were shot, rather than being transferred to Nowy Sącz, despite the existence of a rail connection.  On August 21, 1942, Hamann assembled all of the Jewish officials and announced that the expulsion of the Jews would start two days later, on August 23, 1942. The Jews were ordered to gather that day at 5:00 A.M., next to the Dunajec River between the railway and Helena bridges. The Jewish council instructed the Jews to bring their apartment keys with them, tagged with the owners’ names and addresses. Every person was told to bring 10 kilograms (22 pounds) of food and 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of luggage. The Jews were informed they would be resettled to Ukraine for agricultural work, but many expected the worst, as some Germans spoke openly about the Jews’ fate: “They will come to St. Peter.” 
The Germans launched the Aktion on Saturday August 22 with the arrest of about 200 Jews. They escorted the Jews to the Jewish cemetery where they were ordered to destroy all the tombstones, so as to leave no trace of a Jewish presence in the town. The remaining Jews, around 16,000 people, began to assemble at the Dunajec River late in the evening of August 22. At 6:00 A.M. the next morning, Hamann showed up with Swoboda of the employment office, and other German officials, Gestapo officers, and a police unit. Armed guards surrounded the entire area. The selection began at 9:00 A.M., and after two hours about 750 Jews had been selected for labor details. Those not capable of work were sent back to the ghetto. These people would be sent to the Bełżec extermination camp.
The first train arrived on Monday, August 24, 1942, and left two days later; the last one departed on Friday, August 28. Jews were packed into the rail cars – about 140 in each – and lime spread on the floor of the cars was the only “comfort” they received on the journey to Bełżec.  Many people had to leave their belongings behind, due to lack of space. Each train had approximately 25 railroad cars. The windows of the cars were barred with barbed wire. The Jews that left from Nowy Sącz were gassed on arrival at Bełżec.
Of the 750 selected Jews, about 200 were sent away to other labor camps at Muszyna, Rożnów, and Sędziszów. Those who remained in Nowy Sącz were housed on Kazimierza (Jewish) Street and most were assigned to the Aufräumkommando, tasked with clearing up remaining Jewish property in the ghettos. At the end of August, Hamann also directed the killing of the patients of the Jewish hospital. These individuals were shot in Marcinkowice, about 6 kilometers (4 miles) from Nowy Sącz. After the deportations the Gestapo searched systematically for Jews who tried to hide in the city or in the former ghettos, all of whom they shot on the spot or at the Jewish cemetery.
The work of the clearing group was accompanied by hunger, physical exhaustion, and the emotional strain of witnessing the searches for Jews in hiding and the sale of Jewish property. When a group who worked outside the remnant ghetto was caught smuggling in food, Hamann had all 38 of them shot. As the amount of work declined in late 1942, groups of Jews were sent to Mielec and Tarnów for other work assignments. The remaining 100 or so Jews were sent to the labor camp at Szebnie in two groups in July and August 1943. Altogether, more than 20,000 Jews from the city and its vicinity perished within less than three years. Only a few hundred managed to survive in the various labor camps, in hiding, or on the “Aryan side.”
Heinrich Hamann was sentenced to life imprisonment by the regional court (Landgericht) in Bochum in 1966.
Sources:
The Yiddish-language yizkor book for Nowy Sącz edited by Rafael Mahler, Seyfer Sants (Tel Aviv: Sandzer landsmanshaftn in New York, 1970) contains a particularly detailed section on the Holocaust by Rafael Mahler “der hurbn un umkum,” pp. 721-797; as does the more recent volume in English by Shlomo Zalman Lehrer and Leizer Strassman, The Vanished City of Tsanz (Southfield, MI: Targum, 1997), pp. 247-333. Other relevant published sources include: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 256-266; Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 1979), vol. 24, Lfd. Nr. 635, pp. 269-484 (LG Bochum 16 Ks 1/65, verdict against Heinrich Hamann and others); and Mordechai Lustig, “Ghetto of Nowy Sącz under German Occupation” (testimony written in Hebrew in June 2006; a translation is available at www.jewishgen.org).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Nowy Sącz can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/211, 1203, 1327, 1338, 1703, 2040, 3455, 3456, and 3458); IPN; USHMM (RG-15.019M; 1997.A.0124 (ŻSS)); VHF; and YVA.
Katrin Reichelt and Martin Dean
Nowy Targ
Pre-1939: Nowy Targ, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Neumarkt, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Nowy Targ, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Nowy Targ is located about 80 kilometers (50 miles) south of Kraków. In 1921, there were 1,342 Jews living in the town (16 percent of the total population). In 1939, on the eve of World War II, there were about 2,500 Jews living in Nowy Targ.
German armed forces occupied Nowy Targ on September 1, 1939, the first day of the invasion, due to the town’s proximity to the Czechoslovakian border. A few Jews fled to Eastern Galicia ahead of the German advance. The Soviet authorities subsequently deported most of these Jews to Siberia, after they occupied eastern Poland in mid-September. As soon as the Germans occupied Nowy Targ, they arrested 12 Jewish community leaders on the pretext that they had fired on German troops, and sent them to a concentration camp in Germany. Accompanying the German Army were mobile forces of the Sicherheitspolizei (Security Police). Einsatzkommando 3/I commanded by Alfred Hasselbach advanced through Zakopane to Nowy Targ. According to one source, Hasselbach’s forces murdered 45 Jews in the Nowy Targ area before moving on to Nowy Sącz and Jarosław. 
Among the first decrees issued by the German authorities was for all Jewish businesses to be taken over by a custodian. The larger ones were handed over to local ethnic Germans and the smaller ones were liquidated. All Jews over the age of 10 had to wear the Star of David on their clothing, Jews were not permitted on the town square or the main streets, and they could not buy food in Polish stores. From November 12, 1939, Nowy Targ came under the supervision of SS-Hauptsturmführer Robert Philip Weissmann, the head of the Security Police in Kreis Neumarkt, whose headquarters was located in Zakopane.
The Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat) consisting of 12 members chaired by Meir Ginsberg. The Jewish council’s duties included preparing lists of Jews for forced labor and collecting “contributions” for the Germans. No Jewish police force was created. The Jews were conscripted to perform various forced labor assignments in the town and for the Germans. Jews from Nowy Targ also worked in a stone quarry in Zakopane. The workers received meager food rations and had to work long hours. They were able to receive parcels from relatives provided an “Aryan” delivered the parcels to the Zakopane Judenrat for distribution.  
The Nowy Targ “Jewish residential area” (open ghetto) was created in May 1941. It was located between Kraśińskiego, Waksmundzka, Nadwodna, Jana Kazimierza, and Doroty Streets. Its area was about 1,000 square meters (1,196 square yards). Initially about 2,000 Jews from Nowy Targ and the surrounding region were concentrated there. According to a report by the Kreishauptmann in Nowy Targ, written at the beginning of June 1941, the area around Zakopane had been cleared of Jews up to the gates of Nowy Targ. “The Jews in Neumarkt were currently being concentrated in a ghetto, which later on was also to absorb the Jews from the other locations [in the Kreis].”  The area of the open ghetto was very small and dilapidated. The Jews were persecuted and harassed. For example, the Weissmann family was killed because they bore the same name as the head of the Security Police in Zakopane, Robert Weissmann. From October 15, 1941, leaving the “Jewish residential area” without a special permission was punishable by death. 
Random executions of Jews intensified. The Germans executed several Jews from the Nowy Targ ghetto in the Bolfark Forest near the town. On June 8, 1942, the Germans took several Jews from a feather-plucking plant, shooting and burying them at the Jewish cemetery. Also, Jews charged with trading in foreign currency were taken to the SS training school in Rabka, tortured, and murdered there. 
At the end of July or the beginning of August 1942, SS-Oberführer Scherner, the commander of the Security Police in Kraków, ordered that the Jews from the Szczawnica, Kroszieno, and other villages should be concentrated in Nowy Targ briefly, prior to their deportation. Those who were too old or sick to be moved were to be shot on the spot. During August these orders were implemented, resulting in an additional influx of several hundred Jews into the Nowy Targ ghetto. In Szczawnica, for example, a Security Police detachment commanded by Richard Sehmisch shot 39 Jews, sending the remainder to Nowy Tag. 
On August 29, 1942, the Nowy Targ Judenrat, on instructions from the Germans, announced that all Jews were required to assemble in the Piłsudski sports stadium the following morning. The Jews were told they would be sent to work in Reichskommisariat Ukraine and that they should bring a small amount of luggage. About 3,500 Jews assembled at the stadium, where German and Polish Police surrounded them. Then SS-Hauptsturmführer Weissmann carried out a selection. Old and infirm Jews were hurriedly sent to one side together with the members of the Judenrat. Jews with special skills or craftsmen were also selected into another group on the basis of a list from the work office (Arbeitsamt) and separated from their families. The Jews were then made to surrender their valuables and those chosen for work were loaded onto trucks and taken to a collection point under guard. The mass of the Jews were then escorted to the railway station and loaded onto cattle trains to be sent to the Bełżec extermination camp; Jews from the neighboring town of Jordanów were added to the deportation train, following a similar Aktion there on the same day. In Nowy Targ, the elderly and infirm together with the Judenrat members were taken and shot at the Jewish cemetery. Polish members of the conscripted construction service (Baudienst) filled in the mass grave. David Grassgreen managed to escape the shooting, as he knew the hidden trails in the area. Following the ghetto liquidation, the German and Polish police forces combed the Jewish houses looking for those in hiding. Over the following months a number of Jews were captured and shot in the Nowy Targ area. 
A labor camp was established in Nowy Targ on August 30, 1942. It was located in a barracks behind the train station. The labor force consisted of approximately 35 Jews who had been spared deportation from the Nowy Targ ghetto. The prisoners performed the following types of work: carpentry, plumbing, shoemaking, and sewing. The prisoners also had to sort the clothing that belonged to the murdered Jews. About 10 of the prisoners died in a typhus epidemic. The Germans executed some inmates outside the labor camp. When the camp was liquidated on May 25, 1944, the remaining prisoners were taken to the Płaszów forced labor camp. 
After the war, a few Jewish survivors returned to Nowy Targ and established a local Jewish committee in the town. According to the yizkor book, Poles belonging to the extremist rightwing organization NSZ (National Armed Forces) began attacking and harassing the Jews. Chairman Klinger and six other Jews were given 24 hours notice to leave town; they were shot before the required time elapsed. David Grassgreen, who escaped from the cemetery during the August 1942 Aktion, was also murdered following his requests to the Polish Ministry of Interior for the return of the synagogue, which had been converted into a movie theater. This wave of antisemitic violence convinced the remaining Jews not to remain in Poland; most emigrated to Israel and the United States. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the fate of the Jews in Nowy Targ include the following: Michael Walzer-Fass, ed., Remembrance Book of Nowy Targ and Vicinity. Translation from Sefer Nowy Targve ha seviva (Tel Aviv: Townspeople Association of Nowy Targ and Vicinity, 1979); and Mieczysław Adamczyk, ed., Dzieje Miasta Nowego Targu (Kraków: Drukarnia Narodowa w Krakowie, 1991).
Documents on the extermination of the Jews in Nowy Targ can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1667, 1781, 4707); BA-L; IPN (e.g., Wyrok p-ko Robertowi Weissmannowi i Richardowi Schmieslowi); USHMM (Acc.2004.368; Acc.1997.A.0166; RG.15.019M, reels # 4 and 14; and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 36); VHF; and YVA (e.g., M-1/E/1420 and 1172; O-6/410/5564276; O-41/650/5732776).
Joanna Sliwa
Ołpiny
Pre-1939: Ołpiny, village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Olpiny, Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Ołpiny, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Ołpiny is located approximately 30 kilometers (19 miles) northwest of Jasło. There were 185 Jews living there in 1921, out of a total population of 2,674.
The Germans appointed a Jewish council (Judenrat) chaired by Chaskiel Machler. Benjamin Wróbel served as the Judenrat’s secretary. In May 1940, there were 225 Jews in Ołpiny, including 50 refugees from Łódź who settled there in December 1939. In describing the community’s situation at the time, the Judenrat wrote to the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) that Ołpiny’s Jews are no longer engaged in any kind of trade, which had been their main prewar source of income. 
According to Arnon Rubin, the Germans restricted the freedom of movement of all Jews soon after the occupation, allowing them to go only to the nearest village, and so depriving them of their means of income. The Judenrat delivered 30 Jews a day for forced labor. It also collected money and valuables at the Germans’ request. 
In February 1941, the Judenrat reported 299 Jewish residents. A number of Jews were receiving some food from surrounding estates owned by Poles. 
According to Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Jasło County, the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941, while some Jews were still allowed to live in villages. One of the ghettos established around that time was in Ołpiny. 
Wieliczko established that in the spring of 1942, part of the Jewish population from the ghetto in Ołpiny was moved to Jasło and to Biecz. Rubin, who maintains that no ghetto was established in Ołpiny, dates the resettlement to Biecz in the summer of 1942. Prior to this deportation (June and July 1942), 40 men were sent to the labor camp in Płaszów. The remaining 120 men, women, and children were taken on August 9, 1942 to the Dąbry Forest near Rzepiennik Biskupi and shot there. 
Sources:
The following publications include references to the fate of the Jews of Ołpiny: Mieczysław Wieliczko, Jasielskie w latach drugiej wojny swiatowej (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, 1974), pp. 131, 182-184; Arnon Rubin, The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Communities in Poland and their Relics Today: vol. 3, District Krakow (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University Press, 2008), pp. 259-260.
Archival sources can be found in: AŻIH (210/524); and USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)).
Jolanta Kraemer
Pilica 
Pre-1939: Pilica (Yiddish: Piltz), town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: initially a town, reclassified in 1941 as a village, Kreis Miechów, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: town, województwo śląskie, Poland
The town of Pilica is located 51 kilometers (32 miles) north-northwest of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, there were 1,763 Jews living there. 
Pilica was occupied by German troops on September 5, 1939, and it soon came under the administration of the German civil authorities (the Landkommissar for Kreis Miechow) based in nearby Wolbrom. A German Gendarmerie post was set up in Pilica Castle; there was also a unit of Polish (Blue) Police in Pilica. Until the autumn of 1941, however, Jews were allowed to conduct their lives in nearly the same manner as they did before the war.  
By March 1940, the German authorities had set up a Jewish council (Judenrat) with Ber (Berek) Fogiel as chairman, Ch. Zielony as secretary, and Bencion Uberbaum, M. Blumenfeld, Gutman (Gitman) Wajnsztok, and Dr. Jakub (Jan) Szabszewicz (Szabsiewicz) as the remaining members. 
A Jewish health care organization, Towarzystwo Ochrony Zdrowia (TOŻ), resumed its activities in Pilica on June 25, 1940, under the supervision of Dr. Szabsiewicz. Due to the scarcity of resources, it could only distribute small amounts of basic medicine, yet provided special assistance to Jewish children by serving them a glass of milk, two white rolls, and a slice of bread daily. At first, only 20 children were in its care, but by the end of 1940 it was assisting up to 80. From September 22, 1940, the Organization for Child and Orphan Care (CENTOS) was also active in Pilica.  
By the end of November 1940, the number of Jews in Pilica had increased by 500, reaching 2,253. Most of the newcomers were either deportees from Silesia, or refugees from Kraków or the town of Szczekociny which had been burned down.
On January 1, 1941, the authorities revoked Pilica’s town status and, as a result, all residents were divested of their right to food rations, as they were now treated as village residents. 
A six-man Jewish Police unit was set up on the orders of the Kreishauptmann in April 1941. Its number increased to 10 in May 1942, at which time a sentry was also posted outside the ghetto. 
A branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in Pilica to take over provision of welfare from the Judenrat on July 31, 1941. The committee was chaired by Dr. Szabsiewicz, and it included Bencion Oberbaum and Abram Borzykowski. The Judenrat members, Fogiel and Wajnsztok, soon replaced the latter two. Szabsiewicz resigned in protest, accusing the Judenrat of obstruction of welfare in Pilica. 
By October 1941, 191 deportees from Miechów and Wolbrom had been resettled in Pilica with an additional 200 Jews from other localities. The Judenrat registered 2,500 Jews living in Pilica in December. This number had increased slightly – to 2,572 – by April 1942. 
According to a survivor, Helena Rusinek, the situation of the Jews in Pilica changed after Polish partisans shot two Polish policemen on February 28, 1942. Within days, two retaliatory Aktions followed, in which 11 Pilica residents were arrested and machine-gunned in a public execution. During these Aktions, three Jews were also shot separately.  
After that, approximately 60 young Jews began to meet and discuss the possibility of resistance. Two rifles were purchased with money received from chairman Fogiel, who also informed them of the location of three hidden revolvers and let the group use the typewriter to produce leaflets. Organized in cells of five people each, they entered into an agreement with local Polish partisans. The two groups undertook some joint sabotage operations, such as taking down road signs, loosening railroad ties, and distributing flyers. They further communicated with partisan groups in Jędrzejów and Opoczno and collected 100,000 złoty by going into peasants’ homes and demanding a levy on “pain of death.” Following the disappearance of one of their most active members – Herbert – chairman Fogiel was no longer kept informed of the unit’s plans, as circumstantial evidence indicated that he had betrayed Herbert to the Germans. 
According to JSS records, in April 1942, no separate Jewish quarter had yet been established in Pilica. Possible confirmation of the existence of an “open ghetto” in Pilica just prior to the liquidation Aktion in September comes from the testimony of one survivor regarding the deportation of Pilica’s Jews: “there was no closed ghetto in the town. Jews lived on one street.”  
By July 1942, 100 Jews had been sent to the Płaszów labor camp, and another 75 to the Bieżanów labor camp. A special committee was set up to collect money and food for their sustenance. The Jewish Police was tasked with its weekly delivery.  By August 1942, workshops had been set up in the synagogue with 50 tailors supported by 40 assistants sewing pants.
It was at this time that the Miechow Kreiskommissar visited Pilica and promoted the secretary of the Jewish Police, Leon Teuchler, to its commander. He also increased its strength from 10 to 14 members. 
Pilica’s Jews were aware of the partial deportation of the nearby Słomniki community that took place in early June 1942. On June 8, 1942, the Judenrat chairman warned the community that [when the time comes] “every able Jew must flee to the forest.” 
In the event of a deportation Aktion, the community’s Jewish partisans planned to stock each house with gasoline, set the town on fire, and “die on the spot.” A few weeks later, on September 5, 1942, forces of the SS, the Gestapo from Miechów and Wolbrom, and Gendarmes surrounded the town. All Jews were summoned to the market square, where they were held all day without any food or water. Approximately 20 people, including children, were shot. 
According to Rusinek, 1,080 Jews were deported, while over 1,000 managed to flee.  However, the Encyclopedia of Jewish Life, which dates the liquidation Aktion on September 6, states that the majority of the 3,000 able-bodied Jews were sent to work camps, and the remainder (1,060) to the Bełżec extermination camp from Wolbrom.
By September 12, Chairman Fogiel had received the Germans’ permission to establish an open, remnant ghetto in a separate part of the town, where somewhere between several hundred and 3,000 Jews gathered. They were confined to a few houses near the synagogue under very overcrowded conditions. They worked gathering, cleaning, and sorting abandoned Jewish property.
With the help of local Poles, those partisans who had evaded the deportation built four separate bunkers in the vicinity and moved out of the ghetto. Soon afterwards, a group of ghetto inhabitants were removed, some of them being sent to work camps.  
A police order issued on November 10, 1942 (effective December 1, 1942), listed those towns in Distrikt Krakau where the presence of Jews in ghettos was still permitted; Pilica was not one of them. The penalty for Jews found outside of ghettos was death. A number of Pilica residents managed to move to the Radomsko, Będzin, and Sosnowiec ghettos, before the Pilica ghetto was liquidated in November 1942 and its residents murdered. 
The Jewish underground failed in its attempt to organize local resistance. Most of the partisans were killed when the Germans discovered their bunkers in mid-January 1943. Seventy Jews were reportedly shot in Pilica and its vicinity that month. Some of the Poles who provided shelter, including Maria Rogozińska and her one-year old son, Piotr, and certain Polish policemen were also shot. 
Of the few Jews known to have survived from Pilica, most passed through a series of forced labor and concentration camps, including several who were inmates of Auschwitz.
Sources:
The main published account on the fate of the Jewish community of Pilica during the Holocaust is: Abraham Wein, Bracha Freundlich, and Wila Orbach, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 7 Lublin and Kielce (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1999), pp. 388-392. Reference to a ghetto in Pilica is made also in Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), p. 988-989.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (210/545 (AJDC); 211/789-791 (JSS); and 301/520 and 2856 (Relacje)); USHMM (RG-15.079 (Ring I/122), Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)).
Jolanta Kraemer
Pilzno
Pre-1939: Pilzno, town, Dębica powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Pilzno is located about 100 kilometers (62.5 miles) east of Kraków. A census in 1921 recorded 752 Jews (21.2 percent of the total population) living there. In 1939, on the eve of World War II, 788 Jews were residing in the town, out of a total population of 1,342.
German forces occupied the town about one week after the start of the invasion on September 1, 1939. When the Germans established the Generalgouvernement in late October 1939, Pilzno became part of Kreis Debica within Distrikt Krakau. In Pilzno there was an outpost of the German Gendarmerie and a detachment of the Polish (Blue) Police.
In mid-September 1939, the synagogue was burned down. Starting in the fall of 1939, the German authorities in Pilzno introduced a series of anti-Jewish measures. Jews were made to wear white armbands bearing a blue Star of David, and were required to register with the authorities. Jews were deprived of much of their private property. A Jewish council (Judenrat) was established, which was assigned the task in 1940 of providing Jews for forced labor. Forced labor tasks performed by the Pilzno Jews included road construction work, breaking rocks in a quarry, cutting trees in the forest, and sweeping the streets.
In mid-August, 1940, the Judenrat established a Jewish Self-Help committee, which by the end of the year had become subordinated to the official Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization for the Generalgouvernement, based in Kraków. In late September 1940, there were about 1,300 Jews residing in Pilzno, including 250 refugees, mainly from Łódź, Poznań, and Kraków. 
By the summer of 1941, the JSS had established a soup kitchen, which provided food for the poor. It received occasional food distributions from the Office of Food Supply (Ernährungsamt) of the Kreishauptmann in Dębica, and also more regular financial support from the JSS in Kraków, but little help from the Judenrat. However, the available resources always remained inadequate to meet the needs of the many impoverished Jews in Pilzno.
In July and August 1941, the simmering conflicts between the Judenrat, headed by M. Treibicz and the JSS branch in Pilzno, headed by Leon Kupferblum, intensified. Disputes about the financing of JSS activities in Pilzno were aggravated by personal accusations made by the Judenrat against members of the JSS branch. These disputes were settled temporarily in September, following the intervention of the KreisJudenrat in Dębica. In October 1941, there were 17 cases of typhus reported, mostly among the poorer Jews of Pilzno, which resulted in 3 deaths. 
In mid-December 1941, the JSS branch opened a childcare facility in Pilzno for children of poor Jewish families, providing health checkups, some education, and also supplementary nutrition. In the following months, around 30 children received extra food and care in this facility. 
In January 1942, the head of the Judenrat, Treibicz, was dismissed by the Kreishauptmann and a new Judenrat was formed. Among its members now was Samuel Birnbach, who also served on the local JSS committee. In this way, it was hoped that most of the previous frictions between the two bodies could be eliminated. Twenty-four of the Jews sent for work at the Pustków labor camp returned in January, as they had become infected with typhus there. 
On June 20, 1942, the Jews of Pilzno were informed that they had until July 4, to move to a “closed quarter” (geschlossenes Viertel).  Several Pilzno survivors confirm that a ghetto was set up in Pilzno during the summer of 1942. It covered about 1,800 square meters (2,153 square yards) and existed for just a few weeks. According to Israel Turk, it was set up in a few buildings in the smallest, dirtiest corner of town. Henry Reicher noted that part of the town was fenced off and guarded by the Jewish and Polish Police. The Jews lived crowded together with more than 4 people per room. Sarah Friedman recalls being forced to move out of her house into the ghetto, which was very overcrowded; people slept on mattresses on the floor.  The JSS records confirm that by July 4, 1942, a Jewish hospital had been opened within the “Jewish quarter.” By mid-July, between 400 and 600 additional Jews had been brought into Pilzno from the surrounding villages, half of whom qualified for support from the soup kitchen. At this time, the Pilzno JSS desperately pleaded for a special subvention from the headquarters in Kraków, as all the able-bodied men were assigned to work in Dębica, or further away, and the remaining women and children were left with no means of support. In addition, the resources of the Judenrat were exhausted, due to many additional costs. 
In the second half of July, the office of the German Security Police (Sipo-Aussendienststelle) in Dębica organized the liquidation of the ghetto, assisted by the local Gendarmerie, and other auxiliary forces. During the roundup in Pilzno, at least 17 Jews were killed on the spot, and around 1,500 Jews were sent to Dębica.  According to one survivor, a policeman came to warn his family of the impending ghetto liquidation the next day, so her family fled at night to the countryside. They tried to retrieve belongings they had hidden with Polish neighbors, but these former friends turned them away empty handed.  
From Dębica, together with Jews from other localities, the German Security Police deported most of the Jews from Pilzno to the Bełżec extermination camp. A few able-bodied Jews were sent to Pustków and other labor camps. Some of those sent to Pustków were subsequently transferred to the Auschwitz concentration camp.
In the second half of 1942 and in 1943, after the Pilzno ghetto had been liquidated, the German Gendarmerie and the Polish (Blue) Police hunted down and shot Jews who had gone into hiding. The Chilowicz, Bochner, and other Pilzno families evaded the roundups by hiding in prepared bunkers, but some Jews were betrayed and killed. 
A good number of local Poles decided to help the Jews, and several of them paid for it with their lives, when the Germans discovered their humanitarian efforts.  On February 19, 1943, the German Police shot four Poles for offering shelter to Jews; they also killed the six Jews whom the Poles had hidden. On October 9, 1943, the Germans shot five members of the Rębina family and the 12 Jews they had been hiding, and then they burned down all the buildings on the farm. When Josef Bobrowski was discovered to be hiding two Jews, both he and the Jewish refugees were shot. After the war, Yad Vashem recognized Józefa Rysinska of Pilzno as Righteous Among the Nations for her role in helping Jews during the occupation. Another Pole who provided life-saving help to the Jews was Mieczyslaw Ryba, of Slotiwej. From August 1942 to the summer of 1944, three Jews hid on his father’s farm: Benjamin Deresiewicz, Abraham Einspruch, and Israel Hamel. In the spring of 1943, the brothers Hyman and Mendel Reiner of Pilzno joined them. As the front grew closer, the five Jews moved to another farm. All survived.
Sources:
Information on the persecution and murder of the Jewish population of Pilzno can be found in these publications: Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 385; Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 291-293; Arnon Rubin, The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Communities in Poland and their Relics Today: vol. 3, District Krakow (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University Press, 2008), pp. 268-270; and Guy Miron, ed., The Yad Vashem Encyclopedia of the Ghettos During the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2010), p. 586. Additional information can be found on these websites: “Maurice Chilowicz and the Story of Pilzno,” at www.shtelinks.jewishgen.org; and “Pilzno” at www.sztetl.org.pl.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/792-794 (JSS)); IPN (ASG); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M (ASG); VHF (e.g., # 6985, 10213, 23367, 27137, 30184); and YVA.
Alexander Kruglov and Martin Dean
trans. Robert Haney
Proszowice
Pre-1939: Proszowice, town, Kielce województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Miechow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1999: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Proszowice is located 24 kilometers (15 miles) northeast of Kraków. In 1939, there were 1,450 Jews living in Proszowice. 
The Wehrmacht occupied Proszowice in early September 1939. Dawid Szydłowski was charged with running the town’s Jewish council (Judenrat). The remainder of the Judenrat consisted of the prewar leaders of the community.  A Jewish police force was organized subsequently, and its commander cooperated with the Germans.  
At first, the Proszowice Jews were able to lead their lives much as they had before the war. All survivors emphasize that it was safe and quiet there until 1942. 
By May 1940, there were 1,700 Jews in Proszowice, including 200 refugees. The Judenrat assigned the poor to local families for support and sustenance. A self help committee was set up for their benefit by August 1940 and was chaired by the Judenrat’s president. By October 1940, the number of refugees had doubled, the newcomers being mainly Jews expelled from Kraków. Although many rented from Poles, there was a serious shortage of lodging. 
A typhus epidemic broke out in March 1941. German authorities quarantined the town and Proszowice residents were forbidden to leave. There was no epidemic hospital. A Jewish doctor by the name of Loofenholz attended to the sick. By May 1941, the number of Jews had increased significantly, reaching 2,600. At the end of June 1941, the town was still closed. A soup kitchen was launched to feed the sick, and was maintained after the epidemic for the benefit of the poor. Typhus cases kept reappearing periodically. A hospital fitted with ten beds opened only in June 1942. 
A branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization was established in Proszowice in July 1941 to take over the organization of welfare from the Judenrat. It included the Judenrat chairman Szydłowski as president, Leibuś Felman as his deputy, and Dawid Rozenberg. In the summer of 1941, the JSS soup kitchen served 350 meals daily, including 100 free of charge. In November 1941, the JSS solicited food supplies from 20 Polish estates in the vicinity for the soup kitchen. Nineteen owners promptly responded, promising produce free of charge. By January 1942, the number of Jews in Proszowice had reached 3,008, with the number of newcomers (1,558) exceeding the number of local Jews.  
In June 1942, JSS member Rozenberg accused Szydłowski of abuse of power and called for an investigation of the branch by the main office in Kraków. According to Rozenberg, Szydłowski denied other members access to the organization’s affairs, correspondence, and bookkeeping; the latter was done solely by his brother and sister. He further intentionally delayed two vital matters for the community, these being the opening of workshops and an agricultural cooperative. Although the outcome of Rozenberg’s action is unknown, only Szydłowski’s name appears in subsequent official correspondence. 
On July 15, 1942, the Jews living in the villages surrounding Proszowice were brought into the town. Their number is unknown. 
On June 22, 1942, 100 laborers were sent to Kraków, thereby raising the number of Proszowice Jews laboring in the vicinity of Kraków to 350. A few hundred more Jews were dispatched to Kraków in mid-July. The community was forced to deliver weekly food rations for its laborers. That summer in Proszowice, 50 Jews worked repairing roads, 40 on water irrigation projects for the Strauch Company, 10 for Trunkenpolz in agriculture, 8 for an agricultural cooperative, and 10 aged over 50 cleaned the streets. Approximately 100 women were employed in agriculture in Wierzbno, Kościelec, Jakubowice, Opatkowice, and Kowary. 
A Czech German named Lachowicz and a Jewish refugee from Kraków named Stern organized privately owned workshops in late July 1942. Proszowice Jews generally distrusted Stern, and, of the town’s craftspeople, only the tailors decided to take paid jobs at the workshop. Another obstacle to the workshop’s operations was the local Arbeitsamt, which continued to conscript workshop employees for forced labor in Kraków, thereby forcing Lachowicz to change the status of the workshop from “private” to “collective,” as the latter designation was approved by the Arbeitsamt. The workshops filled sample orders of trousers, drawers, suits, and furs for the Strassberg, Medwitz, and Lichtig companies. By the time production orders were placed by these companies, however, the community was no longer in existence. 
The Jewish community of Proszowice was liquidated at the end of August 1942, probably on Saturday, August 29. One day prior to the community’s deportation, the town was surrounded and the Germans ordered all Jews to report to the market square. Local farmers were forced to provide wagons to transport 2,000 Jews to nearby Słomniki, from where many of the Jews of Kreis Miechow were being gathered for deportation to the Bełżec extermination camp. Posters were hung reminding Poles of the death penalty for helping Jews. 
Those who did not report to the market square were shot in their houses. The elderly and children were selected out and shot. A group of Jews numbering between 50 and 100 were sent to Płaszów by truck. Some volunteered to go.  
Aside from those that fled or hid with Polish friends, the Germans left behind 100 to 200 Jews, including members of the Judenrat and Jewish Police, to gather, clean, and sort the abandoned Jewish property stored under the Judenrat’s care. These Jews formed the basis for some kind of remnant ghetto, as they were subsequently joined by other Jews who emerged from hiding.
Upon the community’s liquidation, the Germans went from village to village in search of Jews in hiding. Those they caught they shot on the spot; Poles found to be sheltering Jewish escapees shared the fate of the Jews. The killings, however, ended after 3 or 4 days, as the German authorities announced that Jews would be permitted to return to Proszowice to live in their own houses. On September 24, 1942, Szydłowski informed the Kraków JSS office of the resumption of social welfare activities, including the reopening of the soup kitchen after “a one-month break.” By this time, approximately 500 Jews had gathered in the Proszowice “ghetto.” Szydłowski further estimated that 700 Proszowice Jews were in the various Kraków camps. After the Germans caught one of his sons pocketing an item from the warehouse, Szydłowski and all his sons were shot together on one day. A total of 26 Jews were reportedly shot in October 1942. 
A police order issued on November 10, 1942, listed those towns in Distrikt Krakau, where the presence of Jews in ghettos was permitted; Proszowice was not one of them. The penalty for Jews found outside of these ghettos was death. This order presaged the imminent deportation of the remaining Jews in Proszowice.  One of the survivors, Al Bukiet, reported that after the main deportation Aktion, he was still able to return from his labor camp to Proszowice for weekends. With time the ghetto became smaller and smaller, and only those who had jobs were allowed to stay. 
The ghetto was most likely liquidated in December 1942, although some sources date it in November. Its inhabitants were sent to Bełżec. 
Sources: 
The fate of the Proszowice Jewish community is mentioned in: Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), p. 1030.
The following archival sources were used for this entry: AŻIH (210/564 (AJDC), 211/820-825 (JSS), 302/66 (Pamiętniki)); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 50; Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); and RG-02.208M (Pamiętniki)); and VHF, (# 01355-1, 07285-3, 11515-6, 19305, 19311, 22337, 31459-4, 31742, 32085, 35546, 37184, 42061-3, 24467-3, and 43560).
Jolanta Kraemer
Pruchnik
Pre-1939: Pruchnik, village, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Jaroslau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
The village of Pruchnik is located 18 kilometers (11 miles) southwest of Jarosław. In 1921, there were 877 Jews living in Pruchnik, constituting 51.7 percent of the total population. Jewish residency was concentrated around the market square, as well as on Kańczudzka, Jarosławska, Kościelna, and Długa streets.
There were 976 Jewish residents in Pruchnik on the outbreak of World War II. Shortly after capturing the village on September 9, 1939, the Germans shot approximately 50 Jews, after having dragged them behind horses through the streets. 
The Germans replaced the majority of Poles serving in the Pruchnik municipality with Ukrainians. A man by the name of Harasymow was appointed as the new mayor; and a certain ‘Kondratko’ became Pruchnik’s wójt. A small German Gendarmerie post was stationed in the village.  
Archival files of the Pruchnik American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) and Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) branches maintain that an open ghetto in Pruchnik was established as early as November 1939. Until the beginning of 1942, the ghetto – located on Długa Street – served as the designated place of Jewish residence; however, its inhabitants could still move freely around the village.  
The Judenrat chairman, Samuel Goldstein, described events leading to the ghetto’s establishment as follows: “In November 1939, the community was expelled to the [new German-Soviet] border, but because the border was [already] closed, they [the Jews] could not cross it. Wanting to return to their houses, they were unfortunately forbidden entrance, and were forced to wander for two weeks until they finally received the authorities’ permission [to move back to Pruchnik]. On their return, they were compressed onto a single street, suffocating in this confined space and dying of hunger.” In this letter, sent to the AJDC’s Kraków office in June 1940, Goldstein requested assistance for the 580 Jews who had returned to Pruchnik (i.e. approximately two thirds of the prewar population), including 25 refugees. By December 1940, the number of ghetto residents had risen to 600. 
In the spring of 1941, the community sought the Kreishauptmann’s permission to teach horticultural and agricultural courses, and for the assignment of uncultivated parcels of land in and around Pruchnik. The Kreishauptmann denied the request. Nevertheless, clandestine schooling of Jewish children took place in the ghetto. Among the teachers was Irena Kudler, who also took part in the underground education of Polish youth in Pruchnik.  
A branch of the JSS was established in Pruchnik in June 1941. A local doctor, Ottmar Schorr (born 1908) chaired the committee, which also included Irena Kudler (deputy) and Bernard Pasternak. On Schorr’s request, Maier Ober replaced the latter due to poor performance, in March 1942. The committee never managed to open a soup kitchen and limited its activity to the distribution of small sums of money or rations. 
According to Schorr, very few men returned after the 1939 expulsion, hence the ghetto’s residents consisted primarily of women, children, and the elderly, none of whom were able to donate any funds for social services. According to the JSS report, there were 137 ghetto residents under the age of 18 in August 1941. Of that number, 39 were 14 to 18 years old. In the summer of 1941, a number of Jews arranged employment for reasonable wages with local farmers. 
In an attempt to increase welfare funds, Schorr wrote to the JSS headquarters in Kraków in June 1941: “The municipality in Pruchnik collects rent from all ‘ownerless’ Jewish houses [those whose owners did not return after expulsion], and even from those whose owners are residing in Pruchnik. Furthermore, the municipality collects significant rental sums from the military quartered now for several months in two synagogues. Of all this income, the Jewish community is not receiving anything.” Schorr requested Kraków’s assistance in persuading the municipality to transfer a portion of this income for the welfare of Pruchnik’s Jews. Furthermore, according to Schorr, expropriated Jewish land had been assigned to private commissars, who were depositing part of the income with the Treuhandstelle (Trustee Office) – not the Jews.  
By January 1942, Pruchnik’s Jews were no longer allowed to leave the limits of the village, due to “the recent order forbidding the Jews to leave their places of residence.” Despite poverty and overcrowding among the Jews of Pruchnik, there was only one case of typhus registered by March 1942. Dr. Schorr was the only doctor serving the community. 
In April 1942, there were 575 Jews living in the ghetto. They occupied 51 houses, comprising 146 rooms. A few of the Jews were permitted to live outside the ghetto; e.g., in June 1942, Schorr lived at 39 Rynek Street, and Irena Kudler at 5 Kościelna Street.
Pruchnik’s Jews remained hopeful of obtaining jobs in agriculture; however, by June 1942, “permissions to go to work on neighboring farms” remained with the authorities. Finally, in mid-July 1942, 65 volunteers were working in agriculture, 15 of whom were under 15 years of age and labored in local orchards.
The JSS reported in June 1942 that: “[the community] recently declined by 20 people, mainly fathers and mothers, who up to now had sustained families, which are now left to their fate.” These people were either sent to labor camps, or more likely shot. In the summer of 1942, over a dozen Jews were reportedly shot by three German Gendarmes near the cemetery. 
As evidenced by another of Schorr’s letters to Kraków, dated August 3, 1942, the ghetto was liquidated between August 1 and 3, 1942. “Because [the] entire local population is being deported, the JSS branch is ending its activities as of July 31, 1942.” According to a secondary source, the community was deported to the Bircza ghetto, and shortly thereafter, upon that ghetto’s liquidation, to the Bełżec extermination camp. An unknown number of Jews were also taken from Pruchnik to the killing site in Wólka Pełkińska, and shot there. The Germans allowed a few families to remain in Pruchnik for at least one month, after which they were moved to the ghetto in Sieniawa. 
Sources:
The Pruchnik ghetto is briefly mentioned in Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich and Muzeum Regionalne PTTK w Brzozowie, 1993), pp. 123-124. 
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (210/565 (AJDC), 211/826-827 (JSS)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS)); VHF (# 5761).
Jolanta Kraemer
Przemyśl 
Pre-1939: Przemyśl, city and powiat center, Lwów województwo, Poland: 1939-1941: Przemyśl was divided into two occupation zones along the River San: the German-occupied right bank (Jarosław powiat, from June 27, 1940, Deutche-Przemyśl); and the Soviet-occupied left bank, Pshemysl’, Drogobych oblast’, Ukrainian SSR; 1941-1944: Przemysl, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernment; post-1998: Przemyśl, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Przemyśl is located about 220 kilometers (137.5 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, Przemyśl had around 54,000 inhabitants, including some 20,000 Jews. Another 4,000 Jews resided in the villages of the Przemyśl powiat.
Przemyśl straddled the demarcation line between the German and Soviet occupation zones in Poland. The city was divided along the San River, creating a German-occupied zone consisting of left-bank Przemyśl (Zasanie), and a Soviet-occupied zone, incorporating the city center and its adjacent districts. 
On September 16, one day after the German capture of Przemyśl, parts of the Einsatzgruppe zur besonderen Verwendung (Einsatzgruppe z.b.V.) commanded by Obergruppenführer Udo von Woyrsch entered the city. Einsatzgruppe personnel collected Jewish men, especially leaders of the community, and then shot them in pits at various locations outside the city, then went on to loot and destroy Jewish homes and businesses. 
By the end of September, the Jews from German-occupied Przemyśl had been expelled across the San River. After the expulsions, only 66 Jews remained in part of the city now called Deutsche-Przemyśl. These Jews were subsequently forced into two buildings on 11/13 Dolińskiego Street; they consisted mainly of sick and elderly refugees from Katowice and Jarosław. In June 1942, the Germans killed them in the nearby village of Kuńkowce.
After October 26, 1939, the Einsatzgruppen administration was transformed into the regional office of the Gestapo under SS-Sturmbannführer Dr. Alfred Hasselberg based in Przemyśl. At this point, Captain Schiffer was appointed as the Kreishauptmann, while SS-Obergruppenführer Schattenheim became head of the local Gestapo.
On June 22, 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union, capturing Przemyśl on June 28 after heavy fighting. Among the city’s 65,798 inhabitants were about 16,500 Jews. 
On November 1, 1941, the Germans reunited the right- and left-bank districts of Przemyśl into one administrative district. On March 1, 1943, Przemyśl became the center of its own Kreis with an area of 1,996 square kilometers (770.7 square miles) and 217,106 inhabitants.
After the Germans captured the city, the Jewish community organized a committee led by Drs. Susswein, Haas, and Duldig. In early July, this committee was transformed into the Jewish council (Judenrat). The German authorities appointed Dr. Ignacy Duldig as head of the Council. Its executive committee consisted of over 20 prominent members of the Jewish community, and had its headquarters on Kopernika Street. The Judenrat was responsible for collecting funds, provisions, and equipment demanded by the local German army command, as well as supplying Jewish laborers for road construction and repairing war damage in the city. Shortly after the German occupation of Przemyśl, the Gestapo arrived and announced a new set of regulations for the Jews. They were to be separated from the rest of the population, made to surrender personal property and valuables, and ordered to abandon their homes and relocate to the Garbarza district of the city. In addition, all Jews aged 16 to 60 were required to register with the Jewish Labor Office, which was subordinated to the German Arbeitsamt, headed by a Ukrainian senior official. Groups of Jewish workers provided manual labor overseen by ethnic Germans and Ukrainians.  
The Judenrat was also responsible for issuing food rations and overseeing the Jewish Police. To assist the starving population, the Judenrat organized a soup kitchen. In addition, members maintained the small synagogue on Mnisza Street (the only synagogue within the Jewish quarter) and several churches (kloizers), particularly on Czarnieckiego Street. 
In July 1941, Jews were forced to move to a designated area of Przemyśl, and after December 26, 1941, the Schutzpolizei became responsible for policing the Jewish district. The Garbarza districta, designated as the Jewish residential area, was bounded on three sides by the bend in the River San. The southern boundary was marked by the Kraków-Lwów rail line. This small Jewish quarter became home to 17,000 people. Initially the Jewish area was not enclosed, and Jews could walk freely though the streets. Only the crossing the river via the provisional bridge was prohibited by the Germans.
On July 3, 1942, the newly-appointed Stadtkommissar, Bernard Giesselmann, issued a formal decree to create a separate Jewish residential quarter in Przemyśl. On July 16, the Przemyśl ghetto came into being, covering roughly the same territory as the existing Jewish quarter. 
The Jews had to move to the ghetto no later than 10:00 P.M. on July 15. Those leaving the ghetto illegally and those knowingly giving shelter to Jews were threatened with the death penalty. All the entrances to the ghetto were closed except for those on Wiktoria (Jagiellońska) and Lwowska Streets. In its final section, the regulation ordered that Jews could only leave the ghetto in order to work. In the early hours of July 16, the fencing of the ghetto began. 
Most sources estimate that at least 22,000 Jews had been resettled into the ghetto by the summer of 1942. Throughout its history, approximately 24,000 Jews passed through the Przemyśl ghetto.
From the spring of 1942 on, the Gestapo and members of the Grenzpolizeikommissariat (Border Police Post or GPK) shot groups of Jews at the Jewish cemetery on Słowackiego Street on numerous occasions. In addition, between June and August 1942, the Germans killed a number of Jews remaining in the surrounding villages. By the end of June 1942, some 5,000 surviving Jews from neighboring villages, such as Bircza, Krzywcza, Niżankowice, and Dynów had been resettled into the Przemyśl ghetto, as the area around Przemyśl was cleared of Jews.
On the orders of Gestapo Chief, SS-Untersturmführer Adolf Benthin, in mid-June1942, the Judenrat had to provide a list of 1,000 young, able-bodied Jews capable of work. On June 18, 1942, people on the list were arrested and handed over by the Jewish Police to the Gestapo and Schupo. On June 20, those not able to bribe their way off the list were transported to the Janowska Street Camp in Lwów.
After sealing the ghetto on July 16, 1942, the Germans prepared for the first large-scale deportation from Przemyśl. The leaders of the Judenrat were notified on July 23, 1942 that the first resettlement for forced labor would take place four days later. Members of the Judenrat, hospital staff and patients, and those with working permits were to be exempted. The Gestapo issued 5,000 work permits to Duldig to be distributed among the 20,000-strong Jewish population. All work cards were collected and sent to the Gestapo on July 24 and given back to the Judenrat two days later with a list of those marked for “resettlement.”
On July 25, the ghetto was surrounded by part of Police Battalion 307, under Captain Schaller’s command. Announcements were posted throughout the city notifying the local population of the resettlement of the Jewish population on July 27 and warning that anyone caught giving assistance to Jews or plundering their property would face the death penalty. On July 27, 3,850 Jews, primarily from the areas adjacent to the synagogue on Mnisza Street, were deported to the extermination camp at Bełżec. On the same day, the head of the Judenrat, Dr. Duldig, and his deputy, Rechter, were killed on the steps of the Judenrat building on Kopernika Street. At this time, several hundred elderly, sick, and disabled Jews were taken to the forest near Grochowce and shot by members of the Sipo, commanded by Karl Reisner. 
The deportations continued on July 31, when about 3,000 residents of Czarniecskiego, Kopernika, and adjacent streets were transported to Bełżec. On August 3, another 3,000 Jews shared the same fate. In total, 9,850 Jews were sent to their deaths in Bełżec between July 27 and August 3, 1942. It was during this first Aktion that, despite the pledges made by the Catholic Bishop of Przemyśl, Franciszek Barda, all Jewish converts to Christianity were shot at the Jewish cemetery. In addition, all of the patients of the Jewish hospital were shot. 
 On November 17, men of the Schupo and Gestapo surrounded the ghetto. The next morning, “Aktion Judenrein” began, in which 4,000 people were collected at the deportation square and sent to their deaths in Bełżec. (Some 8,000 Jews were slated for deportation to Bełżec, but only 3,500 showed up. The remainder were in hiding in the ghetto. Before the trains left, another 500 were pulled from their bunkers and added to the transport.) On the same day, the orphanage was liquidated.
After the second Aktion, the ghetto was reduced in size and partitioned into two ghettos: “Ghetto A” for about 800 people capable of work; and “Ghetto B” for about 4,000 “non-productive” Jews. In February 1943, the two ghettos in Przemyśl were put under the command of SS-Obersturmführer Josef Schwammberger, who was known for his exceptional cruelty. Ghetto A was officially declared a labor camp by Schwammberger, and any contact with ghetto B was strictly forbidden.
Although there was no armed resistance in the ghetto, a dozen young Jews managed to escape in mid-April 1943. An organized group, headed by Brunk, Kastner, and Grin, attempted to reach Polish partisans in the surrounding forests, but was apprehended. All of the escapees, except for one, were shot by Ukrainians just outside the city. On May 10, 1943, Reisner was severely injured, after a Jew stabbed him. The attempt on Reisner’s life brought severe German retaliation to the ghetto when three randomly chosen Jews, Grin, Gründ, and Krebs, were sentenced to be hanged. In addition, approximately 30 Jews in the ghetto were shot as a reprisal.
On September 2-3, 1943, the final liquidation of Ghetto B began, when an entire battalion of German troops rounded up approximately 3,500 Jews and sent them to the Auschwitz II-Birkenau concentration camp.  On September 4, 100 Jews from the ghetto were deported to the work camp at Szebnie. On September 10, the commander of the GPK, Rudolf Benewitz, announced that all Jews who reported for resettlement voluntarily would be assigned to work camps. On the following day, 1,580 Jews gathered at the Grzegorz Piramowicz School on Kopernika Street. After making them undress and surrender their valuables, the Sipo shot them in groups of 50. This Aktion became known as the “Turnhalle Aktion” (Gymnasium Aktion). Another deportation of 100 Jews to the Szebnie camp followed on October 28.
Between November 28, 1943 and February 2, 1944, the roughly 1,000 Jews remaining in the (former) Ghetto A labor camp were either shot or sent to the camps at Stalowa Wola, Szebnie, Płaszów, or Auschwitz II-Birkenau. The last 20 Jewish children in the ghetto were shot personally by Schwammberger. Just before the liberation of Przemyśl, the bodies of Jews killed in the ghetto were burned by the Wehrmacht. By the spring of 1944, only approximately 120 Jews remained in hiding in Przemyśl.
The ghetto was destroyed at the end of February 1944, at which point Przemyśl was declared to be “Judenrein.” The estimated 120 Jews still hiding in bunkers and other places in Przemyśl were mostly discovered and killed over the subsequent months.
On July 27, 1944, the Red Army reentered the city. According to official data, the population of Przemyśl had fallen from approximately 54,000 on the eve of World War II to only 28,144 in January 1945. Of these, there were 22,173 Poles, 3,372 Ukrainians, 415 Jews, 106 Russians, and 78 of other nationalities. Of the 415 Jews in Przemyśl in January 1945, fewer than 250 were prewar residents of the city. The Shoah abruptly ended the thousand-year history of the Jewish community in Przemyśl.
When the SS prepared to launch their first Aktion on July 26, 1942, the military commandant in Przemyśl, Major Max Liedtke, and his adjutant, Dr. Albert Battel requested that Jews working for the German Army be spared. When the request was denied, Wehrmacht forces took control of the rail bridge over the San River. They threatened that no transports would leave the ghetto and ordered the bridge to be blockaded. When the SS commando attempted to cross the bridge, Liedtke threatened to open fire. After phoning their commander in Kraków, Julian Scherner of the Gestapo, they acceded to the request, temporarily saving many Jews from deportation. On the same day, according to survivors’ testimony, an army detachment under Battel’s command broke into the ghetto and used army trucks to whisk off between 80 and 100 Jews to a military barracks for protection.  
After the incident, SS authorities began a secret investigation into Battel’s conduct. They discovered that Battel, though himself a member of the Nazi party since May 1933, had previously attracted notice by his friendly behavior toward Jews. Before the war, he had been indicted by a party tribunal for extending a loan to a Jewish colleague. During his service in Przemyśl, he was officially reprimanded for shaking the hand of the chairman of the Judenrat. Battel’s actions even attracted the attention of Heinrich Himmler, who took a lively interest in the investigation. Yad Vashem posthumously recognized Albert Battel as “Righteous Among the Nations” nearly 30 years after his death. For his part, Major Max Liedtke became the highest ranking German officer to be awarded the same honor.   
In Przemyśl, the number of Christians who provided assistance to their Jewish neighbors will never be known. Whether it was a piece of bread for a starving inhabitant of the ghetto or a hiding place for a Jewish stranger, the true extent of aid given to Jews during their last days can never be quantified. In spite of constant fear and the threat of death, dozens of Christians from Przemyśl, both Polish and Ukrainian, were recognized as “Righteous Among the Nations” by Yad Vashem. Fortunately, much evidence of the kindness and heroism of a number of people from Przemyśl and its vicinity has been documented by those Jews who survived with their help.  
A number of Poles and Ukrainians, however, lost their lives for helping Jews, due to betrayal by neighbors, friends, and even family members. According to postwar investigations, 568 Christians from the Przemyśl Kreis were murdered for attempting to help Jews. For example, Michał Gierula from the village of Łodzinka near Bircza was hanged by the Gestapo after being betrayed by a Polish woman for offering shelter to three partisans of the Armia Krajowa (Home Army) and to three Jews.
Stefania Podgórska and her sister, Helena, saved 13 Jews using a hiding place in the attic behind a false wall in their home at 3 Tatarska Street. Stefania went on to marry Max Diamand (Józef Burzmiński), one of the Jews hidden in her cottage. Their story was made into a film, Hidden in Silence (1996), and a documentary, The Other Side of Faith (1991). The Sisters of the Sacred Heart, a convent in Przemyśl, sheltered and cared for 40 Christian and 13 Jewish children during World War II. Most of the Jewish children there had been either left on the steps of the orphanage at 80 Mickiewicza Street by desperate parents, or had been brought by Polish friends and neighbors. In addition to individuals and religious orders, a local branch of Żegota also functioned in Przemyśl after September 1943. Żegota provided false identity cards, food and money, assisted individuals and institutions sheltering Jews, and protected them against informers.
Karl Reisner was sentenced to life imprisonment by a German court in 1969 for crimes committed in Przemyśl. 
Sources:
Further information on the history and fate of the Jewish population of Przemyśl can be found in the following publications: Aaron Freiwald and Martin Mendelson, The Last Nazi: Joseph Schwammberger and the Nazi Past (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1994); John J. Hartman and Jacek Krochmal, eds., I Remember Every Day: the Fates of the Jews of Przemyśl during World War II (Przemyśl Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Nauk and Remembrance and Reconciliation: 2002); Arie Menczer, ed., Sefer Przemyśl (Tel Aviv, 1964); Joseph Rebhun, God and Man in Two Worlds (Claremont, CA: Or Publishing, 1985); Joseph Rebhun, Leap to Life: Triumph Over Nazi Evil (New York: Ardor Scribendi, 2000); Jan Rożański, “Przemyśl w latach drugiej wojny światowej,” in Tysiąc lat Przemyśla (Warsaw and Kraków, 1974); Józef Sohn-Sonecki, Byłem jeńcem wehramachtu (Warsaw, 1956); Józef Sohn-Sonecki, Byłem więźiem wehrmachtu (Warsaw, 1965); Bronisław Szatyń, A Private War: Surviving in Poland on False Papers 1941-1945 (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1985); A. Wolfshant-Dinkes, Échec et mot: La miracle de ma vie (Paris, 1975); and Hamburger Institut für Sozialforschung, ed., Verbrechen der Wehrmacht: Dimensionen des Vernichtungskrieges 1941-1944 (Hamburg: Hamburger Edition, 2002), pp. 586-592.
Documentation on the fate of the Jews of Przemyśl under the German occupation can be found in the following archives: APPrz; AŻIH (e.g., 301/4957; 211/833-834); BA-L (e.g., ZStL, 205 AR-Z 302/67, vol. 3); IPN; USHMM (e.g., RG-50.002*0131; RG-15.019M, reel 11); VHF; and YVA.
Curt Dunagan
Przeworsk 
Pre-1939: Przeworsk, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Jaroslau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: town, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Przeworsk is located 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of Rzeszów. There were 1,457 Jews living in Przeworsk in 1921, according to the census.
In the first days of World War II, the Jewish section of Przeworsk was severely damaged by air raids. Shortly after occupying the town, the Germans searched the synagogue and allegedly found ammunition there. In retaliation, they razed the building on September 12, 1939. The Gestapo arrived from Jarosław to execute 30 Jews.
Survivor Harry Kupper testified that the Germans, soon after entering Przeworsk, ordered the Jews gathered in a church. After an elderly rabbi failed to report, the Germans selected every tenth man from among the assembled, took them away, and pretended to torture them to find out the rabbi’s whereabouts. After a man disclosed his hiding place, the rabbi was arrested and thrown into a hole for execution. Observing the scene from his window, a priest was shot for intervening. The prisoners, including the rabbi, were released. 
Within weeks, the Germans stripped Jewish stores of merchandise and then closed them. Men, aged from 15-to-70 years old, and women, from 15-to-65 years old, daily assembled at the market square for work assignments. The assignments included cleaning train cars of debris, factory labor, and menial work for the Germans. 
Survivor Zygmunt Margules testified that shortly after the Soviet invasion of Poland, on September 17, 1939, the SS arrived in Przeworsk late one night, beat up many Jewish residents, and “said everybody has to go.”  According to historian Andrzej Potocki, most of the Jews were forced across the San River, into Soviet-occupied Polish territory, including to the nearby town of Sieniawa. The Germans left only 27 Jews in Przeworsk. 
Contemporary documentation of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) indicates that nearly 1,750 Jews were forcibly expelled from Przeworsk. In 1940, the Jewish council (Judenrat), led by Mojżesz Korn, reported that some 2,000 Jews had resided in Przeworsk before the war, but only 25 Jews lived there in May 1940. Another 200 Jews, presumably former Przeworsk residents, were living in neighboring villages. In November 1940, the Judenrat reported “35 souls” residing in Przeworsk. In a retrospective report, dated March 2, 1941, to the AJDC concerning charity efforts over the past year, the Judenrat noted that the same number of Jews were still in Przeworsk. Another 170 Jews lived in its vicinity. There were no refugees or deportees. The Jews had no paying jobs and were living off their “depleted savings.”  
A detailed testimony by Mina Kalter, the only other primary source available to the author, suggests that Kalter’s extended family were some of the only Jewish residents still living in Przeworsk after the expulsions. Because Kalter’s family resided in a house in an undamaged Christian neighborhood, they took in other relatives and a family of refugees from Kraków, bringing the number of occupants to 28.
Kalter recalls that the Germans forced the Przeworsk Jews to reside in a ghetto in October 1939, but does not mention explicitly the forced expulsions, which made the ghetto one of the smallest in the Distrikt. She states that the possible reason for the Germans to establish a ghetto was because: “my home town was only 15 miles from the border that was established then between Germany and the Soviet Union… So we thought that maybe the Germans did not have any confidence in us, knowing that the Russians are only a few miles away; therefore, they separated us from the mainstream of society and maybe from the Soviets. They had no confidence, because that’s all we heard is Jews are Communists, and that’s maybe the reason we are there.”  Two secondary sources report that the ghetto was established as late as July 1942.  
Kalter testified that violence accompanied the Jewish population’s transfer to the ghetto. One day after work, the community was ordered to deliver all valuables and house keys to the town hall the following morning. That day, the Jews were ordered to wait outside their houses with only what they could carry. They were then escorted to a pasture behind the Bernadine monastery. There, the Judenrat members were ordered to dig a hole. The rabbi and his two sons were thrown into it and shot. All the remaining Jews were then escorted to the burned-out section of the town and ordered to reside there. 
Initially unfenced, the ghetto was subsequently enclosed. Kalter describes the situation as follows: “In the first weeks, which was then called the ghetto, it was open. […] Only a couple of weeks later, the ghetto was encircled by barbed wire, by four watch towers that were manned twenty-four hours a day, and nobody could get out any more, except to and from work. There were gates through which the people taken out to work were counted.” The workers were often beaten and insulted. Only working ghetto residents received “a small bread ration and a bowl of soup.” 
Diseases, especially typhus and dysentery, spread due to the deplorable living conditions. The sick were either shot or left to die. “It began to be a very common sight to see on your way to work all the people in the streets dying and dead,” Kalter recalls. She also remembers that separate barracks for men and women subsequently were constructed on the ghetto grounds. The sick, forced to reside in a barrack at the very end of the ghetto, were periodically removed and presumably shot.  
Secondary sources date the ghetto’s liquidation to October 1942, when its residents were sent to the Belżec extermination camp. Kalter, who escaped from the ghetto in March 1941, believes the Przeworsk Jews were deported to Sędziszów Małopolski, an unlikely destination located in Kreis Dębica.
A number of Jews likely perished during the ghetto liquidation or subsequently. Polish documentation indicates 90 Jews were shot in Przeworsk between 1942 and 1943. Some probably were fugitives from the liquidation of ghettos in other localities. The victims were buried in the Jewish cemetery. Nine people were buried in a field owned by Jakub Kapusta in the Mokra Strona neighborhood.  
Sources:
The following publications were used to prepare this entry: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), p. 138; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: Główna Komisja, 1979), p. 410.
Archival sources on the fate of the Przeworsk community include: USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M (ASG); and RG-50.462*0013); AŻIH (210/269 (AJDC), 211/836 (JSS)); VHF (# 7785, 14642).
Jolanta Kraemer
Rabka
Pre-1939: Rabka, town, Nowy Targ powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Neumarkt, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Rabka-Zdrój, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Rabka is located about 60 kilometers (37.5 miles) south of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, around 500 Jews were living there. 
The German Army occupied Rabka on September 3, 1939. In the first months, Jews were harassed and beaten by the Germans, and their property was plundered. The German authorities imposed a number of restrictions on the Jews, including the wearing of the Star of David.
In March 1940 the Germans created a 12-member Jewish council (Judenrat) in Rabka, referred to as the Jewish Community (Jüdische Gemeinde) with Zygmunt Buschbaum as chairman. The other members included: Benzion and Dawid Braunfeld, Salomon Koc, Bernard Borger, Chaim Schiffer, Stiel, Hochman, Szymon Zollman, Izrael Selinger, Filip Ettinger, Scherer, and Samuel Reitenbaum. The Rabka Judenrat held jurisdiction over several surrounding villages and small towns. The Judenrat had to pay “contributions” to the Germans. 
In August 1940, the Germans transferred the headquarters of the Security Police School (Die Schule des Befehlshabers der Sicherheitspolizei und des Sicherheitsdienstes) from Zakopane to Rabka. The purpose of the school was to train future German and Ukrainian Security Police officers and collaborators. SS-Hauptsturmführer Hans Kruger was the founder and first commander of the school. SS-Untersturmführer Wilhelm Rosenbaum was his deputy, and later the commandant. Jews, not only performed forced labor at the school, such as constructing shooting ranges, but also were rounded up, tortured, humiliated, and killed there, serving as live practice targets. Paul Beck, a Jew from Zakopane, was entrusted with organizing the work details.  
As of February 21, 1941, there were 460 Jews in Rabka, 120 of them receiving social welfare assistance. On March 30, 1941 a community kitchen administered by the Judenrat opened in Rabka. Due to lack of food it was forced to close several times during its existence. By June 1941, the Jewish population had risen to around 630. In September, the newly established branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) in Rabka provided financial assistance to 96 people (15 percent of Rabka’s Jews). From September 1, 1939 to March 31, 1942, the JSS in Rabka provided medical help in 143 cases; housing to 30 people; helped 75 people obtain clothing; provided supplementary food to 130 people; and distributed about 66 meals a day in the community kitchen. 
The Jews of Rabka were conscripted for forced labor. In 1941 around 30 Jewish men together with about 300 Poles worked in stone quarries in Zaryte. They worked 16 hours a day, received little payment, and no food or clothing. On October 24, 1941, Jews from Rabka were taken to a labor camp at Czarny Dunajec. Among those sent were 37 men, mainly the elderly and sick, who had previously not been deemed fit for such work. 
The situation of the Jews of Rabka deteriorated in 1942. All Jewish men were enlisted for forced labor. Almost no one received any kind of money for work. There were also conflicts between the JSS and the Judenrat over lack of funds. In February 1942, the Jews were ordered to surrender all winter clothing to the Germans. Four Jews, who tried to hide their clothing, were shot. On April 1, 1942, there were 686 Jews in Rabka, including 370 refugees who had arrived from Kraków and Bielsko-Biała (in Ost-Oberschlesien) in 1940. At this time 200 Jews were receiving aid from the JSS, which was also planning job training for women.  
In May 1942, around 80 forced laborers from Stary Sącz were working in Rabka. In June 1942, another group of destitute Jews arrived from Nowy Sącz. The Jewish council planned to open a tailoring cooperative for 10 tailors and 50 seamstresses, in the hope that productive efforts might preserve the Jewish community, which in July comprised 450 people, as well as 200 Jewish forced laborers from other towns. During the summer, the Germans shot hundreds of Jews from Rabka and other nearby towns in a series of bloody Aktions. 
The first Aktion took place on May 20, 1942. Forty-five Jews from Rabka and its vicinity, who had been identified as elderly or unfit for work during an examination conducted by SS-Untersturmführer Rosenbaum a few weeks earlier, were assembled at the Villa Tereska. They were shot and buried in a mass grave in a small clearing in the forest behind the Security Police School. About 10 of the forced laborers from Stary Sącz deemed unfit were shot with them. 
The second Aktion took place in June 1942. The victims included 45 Jews brought from Nowy Targ (arrested for alleged currency offences) and 55 Jews from Rabka.  The Germans also shot a whole family because it bore the name Rosenbaum, which was the name of commandant Wilhelm Rosenbaum; and the Buschbaum family, because the wife was German and had converted to Judaism.  The third Aktion took place on July 17, 1942 when the elderly Jews of Rabka were assembled by the Germans near the Villa Tereska and shot. At this time the Germans demanded “contributions” from the Judenrat claiming that in return the Jews would not be deported. In the course of daily roundups, the Germans picked up Jews and shot them in the nearby forest.  At the end of July 1942, around 100 Orthodox Jews carrying Torahs were brought to Rabka from Nowy Sącz, tortured, and murdered. 
The deportation of the Jews of Rabka to the Bełżec extermination camp took place on August 30, 1942. The Germans issued a warning that any Pole providing help to the Jews will face the death penalty. Nonetheless, the convent of the Sisters of Magdalene in Rabka gave refuge to Jewish children from many places in Poland. 
The Germans hunted down and murdered the remnants of Rabka’s Jews who had evaded deportation. At the end of August 1942, SS officers hanged 10 Jews at the Security Police School, including a member of the Judenrat.  
Several sources indicate the existence of a form of “open ghetto” in Rabka, but do not date its establishment. From 1940 the Jews of Rabka and its vicinity were conscripted regularly to perform forced labor in the Security Police School. At first, the local Jews were allowed to live in their own houses, while Jewish workers from outside the town were housed near the school in the Słone district. Eventually, all the Jews of Rabka were ordered by the Germans to move into this residential area.  In June 1941, the Germans extended the Judenfrei resort area around Zakopane northward towards Nowy Targ.  A curfew was imposed on the Jews of Rabka. They could remain in the streets for only one hour a day. In January 1942, Zygmunt Buschbaum, as chair of the JSS in Rabka, wrote to the main office in Kraków that German plans to create a Jewish residential area in Rabka had been postponed.  Some sources indicate that the Rabka “ghetto” was located in two or three residential buildings on Długa Street. The ghetto could be accessed from a drug store in the Słone district of the town. 
Wilhelm Rosenbaum was tried in Hamburg in 1967 and sentenced to life imprisonment. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the fate of the Jews in Rabka during the Holocaust include: Michael Walzer-Fass, ed., Remembrance Book of Nowy Targ and Vicinity; translation from Sefer Nowy Targve ha seviva (Tel Aviv: Townspeople Association of Nowy Targ and Vicinity, 1979); Robin O’Neill, “Rabka Police School (Poland)” (Salisbury, England: Yizkor Book Project, 2004), available at www.Jewishgen.org; and Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 416.
Documents on the extermination of the Jews in Rabka can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/3269, 3270, 4727); IPN (SP Nowy Targ Ns IV 5/53, Zg 19/46, 54/49; SP Sucha Beskidzka Zg 8/47/1, 8/47/2-3, 20/48, and 34/46; and SP Żywiec Zg 72/46); USHMM (RG.15.019M, reels 4 and 14; Acc.1997.A.0124, reel 36, JSS (AŻIH, 211/848-850); and RG-50.002*0063); VHF; and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Radomyśl Wielki
Pre-1939: Radomyśl Wielki, town, Kraków, województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Radomysl Wielki, Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Radomyśl Wielki, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Radomyśl Wielki is located 30 kilometers (19 miles) northeast of Tarnów. In 1925, there were 1,425 Jews living in Radomyśl Wielki out of a total of 2,432 residents. In 1939, Jews still comprised more than half of the town’s population.
Soldiers of the Wehrmacht entered Radomyśl Wielki after bitter fighting on September 7, 1939. Immediately, they seized Jewish and Polish men and took them to the local church where they were held for a few days before being released. The Germans beat the nearly 300 captive men, murdering several. Soon after their arrival, the Germans began to conscript Jews for forced labor and also beat and humiliated them. On one occasion, they chased the Jews to the market square (Rynek) and forced them to undress, taking their valuables and giving their clothes to local peasants. They also forced Jews to clean the square with their bare hands and to cut the grass with their teeth. German soldiers raided Jewish homes, confiscating valuables and brutalizing the occupants. 
The German authorities soon imposed a series of discriminatory restrictions on the Jewish community. Although Jewish businesses had reopened shortly after the occupation, Jewish owners were forced to display the Star of David outside the front door. In addition, Jews were forced to wear armbands at all times. Jews could not move freely without a special pass; restrictions on the selling of food were enforced, and ritual slaughter of animals was strictly forbidden. Shortly after the introduction of these discriminatory laws, most Jewish businesses were handed over to local ethnic Germans (Volksdeutsche). Despite the restrictive measures, the Jewish population initially retained some contact with the surrounding villages. Soon, however, Jews were forbidden to leave town even with work passes, and “contributions” and special taxes were imposed on the Jewish community.
The German authorities established a Jewish council (Judenrat), headed by Jeremiah Leibowicz, on January 25, 1940.  Its main task was to ensure that the orders imposed by the Germans were carried out, or it would face severe punishment. It organized quotas of forced laborers every day, and, in response to repeated German demands for contributions, it collected and handed over Jewish property. The Judenrat also coordinated the work of various welfare organizations that were active during the occupation. The Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization in Radomyśl Wielki ran two public kitchens that depended heavily on the branch’s ability to raise funds. According to one report from November 1941, the Jewish community in Radomyśl Wielki, which was largely composed of refugees, was suffering from overcrowding, impoverishment, and famine. Eighty percent of the Jews were in need of welfare support. 
The members of the Judenrat tried their best to spare as many Jews as possible from being sent away for forced labor. The establishment of small workshops and factories provided several Jews with employment, which exempted them from labor conscription. Despite the efforts of the Judenrat, in 1940, kidnappings of young Jewish men capable of work intensified. Many of those captured by the Germans were sent to the Pustków labor camp or to the neighboring village of Dulcza Mała. On April 17, 1940, over 200 people were taken to Pustków; the transport that followed, which also included members of the Judenrat, was more than twice this number. 
In 1941 and 1942, another influx of refugees from Mielec and Dębica caused living conditions in Radomyśl Wielki to deteriorate. Overcrowding and dire sanitary conditions contributed to the outbreak of a typhus epidemic. Once again, the Judenrat acted promptly, establishing a sanitary unit as well as an isolation hospital for those infected. 
In April 1942, member of the Gestapo from Mielec came to Radomyśl Wielki and murdered all the Zionists, including their leader Haskel Eisland. 
The sources disagree on the existence of a ghetto in Radomyśl Wielki. Most archival sources indicate that there was not a ghetto, or even a Jewish quarter, until just prior to the deportation Aktion.  It appears that a “ghetto” existed in Radomyśl Wielki only very briefly in mid-July 1942, serving as a temporary holding area for Jews from surrounding villages during the destruction process.  Prior to this it appears that the Jewish population continued to live beside their Aryan neighbors. However, some oral testimonies and sections of the yizkor book mention the existence of a “ghetto,” without specifying the date of its establishment.  According to J. Ziobron’s essay, following the second transport of Jews to the Pustków camp (probably in 1942), the Germans “sought to create a ghetto in town, and to put all the Jews from the nearby villages in that ghetto.”  It appears that some survivors employ the term “ghetto” to convey the idea that the Jews were concentrated under overcrowded conditions and physically segregated from the rest of the population.
From April to June of 1942, an influx of refugees from Dębica and Borowa further strained the resources of the Judenrat and the welfare organizations in Radomyśl Wielki. Living conditions became unbearable, and tension was further exacerbated by constant German demands. In mid-July 1942, all the remaining Jews from the surrounding villages were brought to Radomyśl Wielki. Soon afterwards, the Judenrat informed the population that had converged on the town that the Germans demanded the establishment of a “ghetto,” but many Jews refused to believe it. 
Shortly afterwards, the Germans asked for a contribution from the Jews, claiming that it might defer an impending deportation Aktion. Although the contribution was delivered, on July 17, 1942, forces of the Gestapo and the police sealed the town. Two days later, in early morning, all the Jews of Radomyśl Wielki were ordered to assemble in the market square with all their possessions. A selection was carried out; and many Jews were murdered during the process, as they were unwilling to be separated from their loved ones. The elderly and infirm (about 150 people) were taken to the Jewish cemetery where forces of the Gestapo, the Gendarmerie, and the Schutzpolizei shot them. Their bodies were buried in a mass grave. Those who remained in the marketplace were transported on carts to Dębica, which served as a concentration point for the Jews of the area. From Dębica, most of the Jews were deported with other Jews of the region to the extermination camp in Bełżec. 
A few Jews managed to escape the roundup and fled to the forests. The Germans and their collaborators hunted down most of them, but one group formed a partisan unit of about 50 people (including a number of Jews from Radomyśl Wielki) in the forest near Dulcza Mała. German raids resulted in the capture of some Jews even in November 1944. One group of 70 partisans succeeded in crossing the frontline to the Soviet side on December 27, 1944. 
Sources:
Further information on the history and the fate of the Jewish population of Radomyśl Wielki can be found in the following publications: Antoni Balaryn, Martyrologia ludności żydowskiej z Radomyśla Wielkiego i okolic podczas II wojny światowej (Radomysl Wielki: A. Balaryn, 1989); a translation by Krystyna Brozyna, The Martyrdom of the Jewish Population of Radomysl Wielki and the Surrounding Areas during the Second World War  (Virginia: M. Miller, C. Fox, 1989) is also available; Radomishel rabati ṿeha-sevivah: sefer zikaron Groys Radomishle un sviveh: yizker-bukh, ed. Hilel Harshoshanim and Yitsḥaḳ Turḳoṿ-Grudberg (Tel-Aviv: Irgun yots’e Radomishel ṿeha-sevivah be-Yisrael, 1971); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 338-341; and Jan Ziobron, “The History of the Jewish Commune in Radomysl Wielki,” first published (in Polish) in Ziemia Radomyska, no. 3/7 (March 1991).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community of Radomyśl Wielki can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1428, 1025, 1103, and 1145; and 211/873); IPN; USHMM (1997.A.0272; RG-50.030*0285); VHF (# 18869, 46584); and YVA.
Caterina Crisci
Ropczyce 
Pre-1939: Ropczyce (Yiddish: Ropshitz), Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Ropczyce is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east of Kraków. On the eve of war in 1939, there were about 1,200 Jews living in Ropczyce. 
Following the invasion of Poland, German troops occupied Ropczyce on September 8, 1939.  In the first days of the conflict, the Germans bombed the town heavily. Jewish homes were particularly affected, leaving more than 30 families without shelter. Upon entering Ropczyce, the Germans burned down the local synagogue, and they harassed and humiliated the Jewish population.  Soon after, the Germans began to conscript Jews for forced labor. In 1939 or early in 1940, the Germans created a Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by Dr. Arnold Meister. Immediately after its establishment, the Judenrat began to take care of the numerous needs of the Jewish community. At the end of 1940, under the patronage of the Judenrat, a public kitchen, a shelter, and a “women’s committee” were established. In 1941 and 1942, following the establishment of a local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization, many of the impoverished and malnourished Jewish children in Ropczyce were provided with food and medical assistance.
By the spring of 1940, Ropczyce had become a collection point for Jewish refugees from the territories annexed by the Third Reich and from neighboring villages. The Jewish population in the town increased from 773 in 1940 to over 1,000 in 1941.
On May 7, 1942, on orders from the Security Police in Dębica, 75 men capable of physical work were sent to the labor camp in Pustków.  A second roundup took place at the beginning of June 1942. The Germans shot 23 people on the spot, and sent 150 more to the Pustków labor camp. In late June 1942, the Jews from Ropczyce and neighboring villages were forced into a ghetto located on Jewish Street. The conditions in the ghetto were extremely hard due to severe overcrowding. 
In July 1942, the Germans liquidated the ghetto. They shot 28 people, mostly children and the elderly on the spot, while the majority of the population was escorted on July 23 to the nearby town of Sędziszów. From there, most of them were sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. A group of young women was loaded on cattle cars destined for this extermination camp. According to information from local Christians, the train also carried lime, which may have poisoned the passengers; however, it is more likely that they were gassed upon arrival at Bełżec. A number of the Jews from Ropczyce were selected as unfit for travel, and the SS and Gendarmerie shot several hundred Jews on the spot in Sędziszów and buried them in a mass grave at the Jewish cemetery. 
Sources:
Further information on the history and fate of the Jewish population of Ropczyce can be found in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 352-353; and I. Rosenfeld, ed., Hayo hayta Ayara Ropczyce (Israel: privately published, 1985).
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community in Ropczyce can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/793 and 301/620); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 44); VHF (# 19939); and YVA.
Caterina Crisci
Rymanów 
Pre-1939: Rymanów, town, Sanok powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1941-1945: Rymanow, Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Rymanów, Krosno powiat, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Rymanów is located about 160 kilometers (100 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. In 1921, of a total population of 3,546 the Jews numbered 1,412. 
On September 8, 1939, the Germans entered Rymanów. Soldiers marched into the town claiming that local civilians had fired on them.  They forced the Jews to assemble in the main square and stand for hours at gun point with their arms up. Soon women and children were allowed to leave and the others were released three hours later. On September 17, the Security Police from Sanok arrived in Rymanów and ordered that all Jews, except for a few families and members of the Judenrat, must leave town and relocate to the Soviet occupied zone. Most of those who crossed the border, however, were able to return home shortly afterwards.  The Jews of Rymanów did not offer any organized resistance to the German occupation.  
On October 26, 1939, when the Generalgouvernement was created, Rymanów was incorporated into Kreis Krosno, within Distrikt Krakau. Large-scale deportations of Jewish populations in the area of Kreis Krosno, including Rymanów, were organized and carried out by the Krosno Border Police detachment subordinated to the main office in Jasło (Grenzpolizeikommissariat (GPK) Jaslo –Aussendienststelle Krosno). The German Gendarmerie and Polish (Blue) Police also participated in these Aktions.
From the fall of 1939, the German authorities enforced a series of discriminatory measures against the Jewish population of Rymanów. They confiscated Jewish businesses and prohibited the free movement of Jews without special permission. Jews were forced to wear armbands bearing the Star of David, surrender any valuable items, and were conscripted for forced labor. Jews were forbidden to buy produce in the market place before 10:00 A.M. The German authorities demanded several large “contributions” from the Judenrat, which were paid.  Furthermore, those able to work were forcibly engaged in the construction of what subsequently became a camp for Soviet prisoners of war during 1941. 
Rymanów became a transit point to which Jews from other cities were brought shortly before being deported to extermination and labor camps. In November 1941, 100 Jews were brought to Rymanów from the neighboring town of Krosno. Jews were apparently able to take with them various kinds of moveable property.   In December 1941, the town of Rymanów had 1,300 Jewish residents, 300 of which were displaced persons from neighboring villages and towns. The Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization was active by 1941, establishing a public kitchen as well as a sanitary commission. The Jewish council (Judenrat) was headed by H. Spira and P. Silber. It established a Jewish police force to assist it in enforcing German regulations and demands for laborers.  
Information on the ghetto in Rymanów is sparse and somewhat contradictory. The majority of the Jewish population was not significantly displaced, as most Jews lived within the “Jewish residential quarter” near the center of town. Jews brought in from neighboring towns and other refugees were moved in with the original population, and no physical barriers were erected around the Jewish quarter, which served as an open ghetto. By 1942, leaving this area without permission was punishable by death. There was also a camp or area of Jewish concentration on the outskirts of the town at Posada Dolna. This served both as a transitory holding area for some Jews before being sent on to labor camps or sites of destruction, and as a lodging place for those performing forced labor for the Kirchhof road construction firm. The sources occasionally refer to this specially constructed Jewish “camp” as a ghetto. Both the camp at Posada Dolna and the area of the Jewish quarter in the town had been established by early 1942 (some sources date these events in 1941). 
In March 1942, the entire Jewish population, including those who had been displaced there from other cities and towns, were officially registered. In July 1942, almost 600 Jews from throughout Kreis Krosno were moved to Rymanów, causing further overcorwding and pressure on limited resources. Those able to work were promptly registered by the Employment Office, in order to be eligible to receive assistance from the JSS. 
At the beginning of August 1942, a selection took place. The Gestapo informed the Judenrat that a group of Jewish men fit for work was to assemble on the marketplace the next morning. Two hundred young men between the ages of 18 and 35 answered the order. They were subsequently divided in two groups. One was sent to the Kirchhof facility, the other was directed to the railway station where the men boarded a train headed for the Płaszów labor camp.  Deportations to extermination sites at Bełżec and Barwinek near the Slovak border followed soon after. On August 13, 1942, a group of SS men and local militia surrounded the town and ordered all Jews to report to the market place. Women, children, and those unable to work, as well as those who were living in the outskirts of Rymanów, were shot on the spot.  The assembled mass of Jews was then divided into groups; the elderly were taken to Barwinek and subsequently murdered in the woods near the border town of Dukla.  A number of those able to work was sent to the Kirchhof facility, while the rest of those assembled in the marketplace were taken to the railway station and loaded onto trains probably destined for the Bełżec extermination camp. The police forces then patrolled the town hunting down and shooting Jews they found in hiding for several weeks after the deportation. The Kirchhof workers were employed for a few more weeks and were then sent to Rzeszów. Their fate is unknown. 
Although the Rymanów ghetto had been almost completely liquidated, in August 1943 around 100 Jews coming from Brzozów, the area around Rymanów, and the town itself were shot by unidentified members of the Gestapo and two SS officers, Neumann and Keller from the Krosno Border Police Office. The corpses of this group were buried in a mass grave at the local Jewish cemetery. 
 According to the testimony of P. Dager and B. Scherrer, there were roughly 400 survivors, about 20 of which had survived the camps. Those who were not deported mainly survived in hiding with the aid of non-Jews, on forged “Aryan” papers, or because they had crossed into the Soviet Union prior to June 1941.
Sources:
Further information on the history of the Jewish community in Rymanów can be found in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 356-358; Yosef Rotem et al., eds., Rimanov: toldot ha’ir ve-haye ha-Yehudim b’temunot (Israel: Y. Rotem, G. Vainreb, Y. Sharar, 2001); and A. Potocki, Zydzi Rymanowscy (Krosno: APLA, 2000). The ghetto in Rymanów is mentioned in Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 440.
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community of Rymanów during the war can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/235); IPN; ITS; USHMM (RG-15.019M, reel 1; and Gazeta Żydowska); VHF (e.g., # 1077, 10361); and YVA (e.g., O-3/2283; M-1/Q/38, 205; M-1/E/2139, 2171, 2197).
Caterina Crisci
Rzepiennik Strzyżewski
Pre-1939: Rzepiennik Strzyżewski, village, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Rzepiennik Strzyzewski, Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Rzepiennik Strzyżewski, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Rzepiennik Strzyżewski is situated on the small Rzepianka River, approximately 30 kilometers (19 miles) south of Tarnów. An estimated 40 Jewish families lived in Rzepiennik Strzyżewski in 1939.  
The German Army occupied the village in early September 1939, but there is no information on how this initially impacted the Jewish community. The new administration set up a German Gendarmerie post. The synagogue was destroyed.
Moses Braw was appointed as the chairman of the Jewish council (Judenrat) and D. Baranker was its secretary. In January 1940, the Judenrat reported only 169 Jews living in Rzepiennik Strzyżewski, 10 of them refugees from Kraków. The American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) archives contain a list of recipients of donated flour distributed by the Judenrat in December 1940. The list contains the names of the heads of 26 families amounting for close to one half of the community – 97 people.  
On August 28, 1940, 12 expellees from Łódź arrived in Rzepiennik. They were housed with local Jewish families who also provided them with sustenance. Even the arrival of such a small group became a heavy burden on the impoverished community. The Judenrat set up a welfare organization with Simson Kirschenfeld as the chairman. Its primary purpose was to seek any help available from the AJDC and the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization.  From mid-1942 onward, Dawid Kahane was in charge of local welfare. 
By January 1941, the number of Jews in Rzepiennik had increased to 241. Another group of expellees – numbering 36 in all – came from Oświęcim in February or March 1941. The Judenrat housed them together by assigning them to flats, and provided them with beds containing straw for padding. A soup kitchen was opened for their benefit, serving up to 65 meals per day. The kitchen did not last very long due to financial constraints, but it was reopened in May 1942. In the meantime, a small amount of donated groceries was distributed. In March 1941, the Judenrat reported 300 Jews living in Rzepiennik.  
On the orders of the Kreishauptmann in Jasło, Dr. Walter Gentz, a ghetto was established in Rzepiennik Strzyżewski at the end of 1941.  Again, there is no information regarding how the ghetto’s founding changed the community’s life, the size of the ghetto, or restrictions on movement. Most likely Jews remained in those houses they had lived in since before the war. A Jewish police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) was organized and charged with keeping order among the ghetto’s inhabitants. 
By June 1942, Jewish farmers from the surrounding villages, including the other Rzepienniks, were resettled into the ghetto, thereby bringing the number of residents to over 400. 
Information regarding disease in the ghetto is lacking; however, it is likely that the community was on the verge of an epidemic, as all residents were vaccinated for typhus in the summer of 1942. The Judenrat’s Sanitation Committee periodically checked yards for cleanliness. That summer, 45 laborers were employed in road works, and 8 women worked as gardeners “beautifying the neglected appearance of the village.” 
In July 1942 a new chairman of the Judenrat, Jechiel Loria was appointed.  
German forces commanded by the Gestapo chief in Gorlice, Ernst Fundheller, assisted by Gendarmes from Rzepiennik Strzyżewski, Jasło, and Gorlice liquidated the ghetto on August 11, 1942. The community was made to believe that it would be deported to a different location. Each person was allowed to take up to 25 kilograms (55 pounds) of luggage. Thirty young men were selected from the group and sent to the Gorlice ghetto.
The remaining 364 Jews were led to a nearby meadow by a ravine. Formed in rows of four all were marched to the nearby Dąbry Forest located about .08 kilometers (0.5 miles) from the ghetto. In sequence, groups of 10 people each were forced to undress and walk approximately 220 yards (201 meters) through bushes to a bench. Sitting on the bench, they were shot in the head in succession. A young boy would throw the dead bodies into a large hole, powdering them with lime. The mass shootings were completed by nightfall. Active participants in the shooting included Paul Roloff the Gendarmerie commander in Jasło and Alois Viellieber, deputy commander of the Gorlice Gendarmerie. 
Only a few names of those murdered are known: Dawid Dembitzer with his wife and daughter; Berl Kochane with his wife, daughter, and son-in-law; the families of Judo Sped, Pachel Taffel, Gast, Kirschenfeld, Kornfeld, and Teller. A number of Jewish residents that were at some point brought to the Rzepiennik ghetto from the nearby village of Ołpiny may also have been among those murdered. 
In Gorlice, 30 men from Rzepiennik were collected on the edge of the town in a shoe factory on Polna Street. They were most likely included in the transport that was sent to Belżec on August 17, 1942.
It is not known how many Rzepiennik Jews managed to escape the liquidation. On September 8, 1942, the shochet Chaim Stamler, his wife Miriam, and two-year old child were shot by the German Gendarmerie near a forest in Rzepiennik Strzyżewski. They were buried together at the place of execution.
Sources:
Brief information on the Jews of Rzepiennik Strzyżewski can be found in these publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 154-155; and Rejestr miejsc i faktów zbrodni popełnionych przez okupanta hitlerowskiego na ziemiach polskich w latach 1939-1945: województwo tarnowskie (Warsaw: GKBZHwP, 1984), p. 166.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1113 (Relacje), 210/610 (AJDC Rzepiennik Strzyżewski), and 211/918 (JSS Rzepiennik Strzyżewski)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 44, and RG-15.084M, # 1113).
Jolanta Kraemer
Rzeszów   
Pre-1939: Rzeszów, city, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Reichshof, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Rzeszów, województwo podkarpackie, Poland 
Rzeszów is located about 156 kilometers (97.5 miles) east of Kraków. In 1931, there were 11,228 Jews living in Rzeszów out of a total population of 26,902. On the outbreak of World War II, there were probably about 14,000 Jews living in the city.
The Germans bombarded Rzeszów on September 9, 1939, and occupied the town on September 10. As the German forces drew closer many Jews tried to flee to the east, but most were turned back. The Germans ordered a census, including a special listing of the Jews. Many were put to forced labor, including office and street cleaning, road and bridge repairs, and other forms of menial labor. During this work the Jews were beaten and the beards and payot (side locks) of Orthodox Jews were torn off their faces. Within the first month, the interiors of the synagogues were trashed and their contents desecrated. The better apartments of the Jews were taken over by German officers. The Jewish hospital was turned into a military installation.
At the end of October 1939, a 30-man Judenrat, headed by the attorney Kleinman, was appointed. A Jewish police force, commanded by Leon Brezner, was also established. The Judenrat had to raise “contributions” demanded by the Germans and organize the quota of forced laborers.
From December 1, 1939, Jews aged 12 and older were ordered to wear white armbands with a blue Star of David. Their movement about the city was restricted and train travel forbidden. A 7:00 P.M. curfew was imposed. In December, thousands of Jews from Kalisz, Łódź, and Upper Silesia were forcibly resettled to Rzeszów. They were housed in synagogues and the old army barracks. All Jews aged 16-55 were examined by physicians to see if they were fit for labor. Those who passed were registered at the Labor Office. 
The Germans changed the name of Rzeszów to Reichshof. During 1940, the principal disruptions for the Jews were caused by arbitrary house searches and kidnappings for forced labor. People of means were able to bribe their way out of forced labor, paying for replacements. The German mayor (Stadthauptmann) ordered the removal of Jewish businesses from the main streets of the city, which in turn created some all-Jewish streets, although a ghetto was not created at this time. 
By 1941, it was evident that the Germans were planning to establish a ghetto. Starting in June of that year and continuing throughout the fall, the Jews were ordered to vacate their homes and move onto the special streets designated for the ghetto.  The official announcement of the establishment of the ghetto was published on December 17, 1941. The ghetto area included these streets: Galenzowsky, Wenska, Tannenbaum Slowacki, Kazimierz, Baldachowka, Szpitalna, Blum, and Mickiewiecz. There were entrance gates at three streets – Mickiewicz, Galenzowsky, and at the junction of Kazimierz with Baldachowka. The part of the ghetto lying between Targowica and Lwowska streets was marked out in such a way that only the buildings were in the ghetto, but the streets themselves were outside it. In order to pass from one house to another people had to make holes in walls, cross over balconies or go through improvised passages and gangways. By December 1941 all the Jews had moved into the ghetto.  
On January 5, 1942, posters were put up around the ghetto, signed by Kreishauptmann Dr. Heinz Ehaus, prohibiting Germans and other “Aryans” from entering the ghetto without a special pass.  This order followed other measures also affecting the movement of Poles, designed to combat the spread of typhus. On January 10, 1942, the Rzeszów ghetto was sealed. By this time the ghetto had been enclosed by walls and wooden fences, and surrounded by barbed wire. Houses along the ghetto perimeter had had their windows and doors boarded up. At this time the number of people imprisoned in the ghetto is estimated at 12,500. The only people permitted to leave the ghetto were those being taken to forced labor. Within the ghetto there were workshops for tailoring, shoemaking, and upholstery. The Judenrat was ordered to open a medical clinic to replace the Jewish clinic outside the ghetto that was shut down.
In addition to the work noted above, Jews were put to forced labor at installations belonging to the German air force, in a factory formerly owned by Jews, on nearby farms, and in military camps. Those allowed outside the ghetto for work fared somewhat better than those locked in with no access to food and because of the poor sanitary conditions. Epidemics of dysentery and typhus drove up the mortality rate and bodies piled up in the streets. The Judenrat established a small hospital, which lacked both beds and medicine. The Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) provided support for 2,500 people and two public kitchens distributed hundreds of portions of soup on a daily basis. The Judenrat received permission to grow potatoes in a field outside the ghetto. Some of the small ghetto workshops served German clients, which enabled the ghetto inhabitants to acquire supplementary food.  In the spring of 1942, a number of forced laborers were transfered to a labor camp in Biesiadka, where they cut down trees.
The Judenrat established an elementary school, which functioned until the large Aktion of July 1942. The Judenrat also offered vocational training courses to provide more people with “essential skills” that might keep them alive. There were courses for training electricians, carpenters, nurses, and for people working in agriculture.
In addition to the Jews of Kalisz and Łódź, other Jews from the vicinity were brought in to the Rzeszów ghetto. The overcrowding became severe, sometimes with more than one family to a room. In January 1942, the inhabitants were ordered to turn in their fur garments. On April 30, 1942, the Gestapo in Rzeszów conducted a “Kommunisten-Aktion” against the Jews of the ghetto. Gestapo men arrested a number of Jews as alleged communists. These people were then tortured in prison before being killed. The Judenrat was instructed to collect the mutilated bodies and bury them. 
In June 1942, Kreishauptmann Dr. Ehaus imposed a massive “contribution” of 1 million złoty on the Reichshof ghetto, threatening to kill members of the Judenrat if the sum were not paid within one week. The other Jewish councils in the Kreis also had to deliver smaller sums to the Kreishauptmann personally at this time. According to a survivor from Kolbuszowa, the Judenrat from that town was the only one not to suffer losses at the hands of Dr. Ehaus during this Aktion. It was probably at this time that Kleinman and several other members of the Rzeszów Judenrat were executed, although some secondary sources date this much earlier in 1940. 
On June 25-27, 1942, congestion in the ghetto became intense with the transfer of Jews from Łańcut, Tyczyn, Kolbuszowa, Glogów, Sokolów, Sedziszów, Czudec, Jawornik Polski, Błażowa, Niebylec, and Strzyzów to the Rzeszów ghetto. Mina Perlberger recalled the scenes as the Jews crowded into Rzeszów: “The wagons, starting to move, were lined up, and it was impossible to see the beginning or the end of the line. It was wagons from all the small towns around Rzeszów, Błażowa, Jawornik, Tyczyn, going in one direction: Ghetto.” Word soon spread that there was insufficient space to accommodate all the Jews and that people would have to sleep in the streets. 
Once they were all settled into the Rzeszów ghetto, there were now three families to a room. By early July 1942, the ghetto population had reached around 22,000 people. At that time the Judenrat was notified by the German authorities that the evacuation of the ghetto would begin in a few days, starting with those who were unfit for work or in an otherwise weakened condition. Everyone was told to bring a few personal effects, including jewelry, and a two-day supply of food. Placards informed the public that any Pole who hid a Jew would be shot. 
The massive expulsion began on July 7 and was carried out in four stages: July 7-8, July 11, July 14-15, and July 17-18. At each stage the sector of the ghetto designated for removal was surrounded by forces of the Order Police and the Gestapo. The inhabitants were ordered to assemble in the old Jewish cemetery. People lingering in their dwelling places for any reason were shot on the spot. The assembled Jews were stripped of their possessions. “Essential” workers and their families were exempted from the expulsion. Patients in the hospital were forcibly removed. Jewish doctors slipped poison to some of their patients to spare them from the ordeal. The remaining hospital patients, occupants of the old age home, and others unfit for labor (about 1,000 people) were taken to the Rodna Forest (between Rzeszów and Glogów) and murdered. The majority of the ghetto inhabitants were marched to the train station at Starowina and sent to Bełżec.  
The evacuations continued throughout July. The empty apartments were turned over to Poles who had been evicted from their own dwellings to make way for German occupants. During this period nearly 20,000 Jews were deported and hundreds were shot.  At the end of this major Aktion, the only ones left were those with a special stamp on their identification cards.
Following this major Aktion, the size of the Rzeszów ghetto was reduced to the area between Baldachowka and Kaczmarska Streets. In November 1942, the Germans designated the Rzeszów ghetto as one of the five ghettos in Distrikt Krakau, in which the remnants of the Jewish population in that area would be concentrated.  At this time, only 3,000 Jews remained, mainly essential workers and their families, but also people who had evaded the expulsion – the “illegals.” 
The ghetto was divided into two sectors – one to the right of Baldachowka Street and the other to the left. The Eastern ghetto (# 1) was run like a concentration camp. It was surrounded by barbed wire and lit up by searchlights. Each morning the prisoners were lined up for a roll call. The beds were removed and replaced by wooden shelves, and a barrier separated the men from the women. The Western ghetto (# 2) was called the Schmelz (smelting) ghetto by the Jews and was for the elderly, the children, and those unable to work. In August 1942 women with children were ordered to register for “light labor.” With a perversity of hope this was interpreted as a positive sign; women who had no children “borrowed” a child from their neighbors. As they reported for the registration they were surrounded by an SS unit and then sent to the Bełżec extermination center.
On November 15, the Gestapo ordered everyone with a labor permit to assemble at the roll call square. Many brought their children with them, based on the assumption that their work permits would protect the children as well. As the workers stepped forward and were checked off, the children were detained for placement in a “children’s home.” During this Aktion around 1,500 Jews (mainly children) were loaded onto trucks and taken to their deaths. 
Between December 1942 and June 1943 there were numerous Aktions that led to the murder or transfer to work camps of the ghetto inhabitants. Jews continued to work making clothes for the German army and dismantling the houses in the ghetto, among other tasks. The head of the Judenrat in this period was a Jew named Serog from Teschen in Silesia.  In March 1943, 22 Jews were shot as they entered the ghetto from work. In late August or early September 1943, the existence of the two ghettos came to an end. The remaining inhabitants, about 2,500 to 3,000 people, were assembled on Baldachowka Street. Some were transferred to the forced labor camp at Szebnia and many of the others were deported to Auschwitz. About 150 were held back to clean up the ghetto area and collect the belongings of the deported.  After this date, around 450 Jews remained in Rzeszów in the forced labor camp at the aero-engine factory (Zwangsarbeitslager im Flugmotorenwerk Reichshof), which existed until the summer of 1944.  
Sources:
Information on the fate of the Jews of Rzeszów during the Holocaust can be found in the following publications, among others: M. Yari-Wold, ed., Kehilat Raysha; sefer zikaron (Tel Aviv: Former Residents of Rzeszow in Israel and the USA, 1967); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 155-170; Encyclopaedia Judaica (Jerusalem: Keter, 1972) 14: 537-538; Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1998 and 2004), vols. 23 and 32, Lfd. Nr. 619 and 711; Stanisław Kotula, Losy Zydów rzeszowskich 1939-1944: Kronika tamtych dni (Rzeszów, 1999); Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004); Stanisław Poradowski, “Zagłada Żydów rzeszowskich,” Parts 1 thru 4, BŻIH (1983-1988); Hilde Huppert, Hand in Hand mit Tommy: Ein autobiographischer Bericht 1939-1945 (St. Ingbert: Werner J. Röhrig, 1988).
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (e.g., 211/922 to 933, 301/4968); BA-L (B 162/2275-2277); IPN; USHMM (e.g., RG-02.054); USHMMPA (WS # N05250, N05264, N64876, N64897, copies received from MOR); VHF (e.g., # 907, 19803, and 24020); and YVA.
Samuel Fishman and Martin Dean
Sanok
Pre-1939: Sanok, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: center, Kreis Sanok, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Sanok is located approximately 200 kilometers (125 miles) southeast of Kraków. In 1938, there were 4,773 Jews in Sanok (including 324 Jews from Posada Olchowska, which was incorporated into the town in 1930). At the onset of World War II, more than 5,000 Jews were living in Sanok, including a number of refugees from Germany, Austria, and western Poland. 
German armed forces occupied Sanok on September 8, 1939. On the night of September 16-17, the Germans burned down three synagogues and destroyed two Jewish printing houses and libraries, containing some 4,000 volumes. On September 26, the Germans ordered 150 Jewish families across the San River into the Soviet zone of occupation. The Aktion was organized by Einsatzkommando I/1. Jews from Kraków, Bochnia, Tarnów, Krosno, and Rymanów were also deported into the Soviet zone via Sanok, and others came to Sanok, attempting to cross the border voluntarily. By the end of 1939, the Soviet authorities had more or less closed the border.
In October 1939, Sanok became a Kreis center within Distrikt Krakau. The first Kreishauptmann was Dr. Schaar; Dr. Class succeeded him from the second half of 1941 until the start of 1943. Primarily responsible for the anti-Jewish Aktions in Sanok was the office of the Border Police (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, or GPK); especially the members of its Gestapo section.
In the fall of 1939, the Germans started to confiscate and liquidate Jewish businesses. From December 1, Jews aged over 12 had to wear armbands bearing a blue Star of David. The Germans appointed Leon Werner as chairman of the Jewish council (Judenrat), which had to provide a daily quota of forced laborers aged between 14 and 60. More wealthy Jews, however, were permitted to pay for replacements. Jewish men worked mainly cleaning and repairing the streets, while women and children worked either as domestic servants or were forced to gather rocks from the San River. The Jews were poorly paid and malnourished, so they had to barter possessions for food on the black market. 
On their arrival, German officials started to evict Jews in order to take their apartments, and Jews also had to meet German demands for furniture. Soon the Jews expelled from their homes and those living in other areas of town were all required to move into several designated Jewish residential areas within Sanok. The movement of Jews was restricted; they could leave the town only up to the distance of one kilometer (0.6 mile) and only during specific hours. In order to travel further afield, they required special permits issued by the Kreishauptmann. The penalty for disobeying these rules was death. According to several sources, the resettlement of the Jews into specific quarters within Sanok effectively meant the establishment of an open ghetto, although it is difficult to date this precisely. 
As of December 1940, there were about 9,000 Jews in Kreis Sanok, of which some 2,500 lived in the Kreis center.  According to a report of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), in July 1941, there were 2,700 Jews in Sanok, including: 140 merchants; 120 skilled workers (of which 68 owned businesses, mainly tailors, shoemakers, and tinsmiths); 200 laborers; 6 self-employed; and 600 unemployed. Furthermore, 350 Jews were receiving assistance, while another 550 had applied for aid. The community kitchen distributed daily meals to 175 Jews; 102 Jews received medical help; and 144 families were receiving financial assistance.  In September 1941, the Sanok JSS reported there were 2,400 Jews in the town, of whom 334 were receiving assistance. Fifty Jews were performing forced labor.  Around this time (at Rosh Ha-Shanah), the Gestapo arrested a group of Jews while praying and deported them to Auschwitz. 
As of December 12, 1941, the Kreishauptmann in Sanok introduced a law restricting the residence of Jews within the Kreis. Jews, who were not permanent residents before June 22, 1941, were not permitted to settle in Kreis Sanok. Any Jews who had arrived after this date were required to leave the area. The Judenräte were required to report any Jewish newcomers to the office of the Kreishauptmann. Violators of the law would be severely punished.  In the winter of 1941-1942, the Jews had to surrender all items of fur clothing to the Germans. 
From the spring of 1942, the Gestapo in Sanok conducted repeated registrations of the Jews in the town, dividing them into those able to work and those unfit for work.  From this time, members of the Gestapo regularly arrested groups of Jews and shot them in the Jewish cemetery on Kiczury Street. The Judenrat was forced to send other Jews to bury the bodies. Among the victims were Jews who had appealed against their categorization as unfit for work, and probably some who had returned from Distrikt Galizien, but others were shot more or less at the whim of the Gestapo. At the end of the occupation, the Polish authorities uncovered more than 30 mass graves here, containing the bodies of around 1,000 Jews. The other Jewish cemetery was razed, and the Germans used the matzevot (tombstones) to pave the roads. 
In mid-summer 1942, the Germans dissolved the separate Jewish quarters in Sanok and established a single enclosed ghetto in the town, which was closely guarded. Jews could only leave it with a special pass to go to their work places. Jews caught outside the ghetto without permission faced the death penalty.  It was located on Jagiellońska Street and covered 2,000 square meters (almost 2,400 square yards). Initially, about 2,500 Jews inhabited the ghetto, but additional Jews were brought there from other places in the Kreis. Some Jews left the ghetto daily to work in road construction and at a railway carriage factory. Others worked in a labor camp based at the Trepcza quarry on the outskirts of town. The death rate in the ghetto reportedly was about two people per day. 
In preparation for the deportations from Kreis Sanok, the Germans also established a transit camp for Jews at Zasław, about 8 kilometers (5 miles) south of the town. This was an unfinished paper factory, with its own railhead, that was surrounded with barbed wire. The only accommodation was in primitive barracks. From the middle of August the Germans started to concentrate Jews in Zasław, for example from Lesko, Bukowsko, and Ustrzyki Dolne. The camp’s location within a factory was exploited to make Jews believe they would find employment there, but most were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp within days.
On September 5, 1942, the Germans announced on placards that all the Jews in the Sanok ghetto would be taken to the Zasław camp.  Then on September 10, the German Police, assisted by Ukrainian auxiliaries, conducted a major deportation Aktion. The Jews were ordered to appear with luggage in front of their houses, leaving their keys behind. It was announced that anyone providing help to Jews would be punished by death. The Jews of Sanok were taken to the Zasław camp, where in total more than 11,000 Jews from the region were crammed into barracks suitable for only about 500 people. The sick and the disabled were shot at the Jewish cemetery in Sanok. After a few days, some 4,000 Jews from Kreis Sanok were deported to Bełżec. Soon afterwards, two more transports carrying about 9,000 Jews in total were sent from Zasław to Bełżec. 
On September 14, 1942, Stadthauptmann Class announced the creation of three separate Jewish camps (or remnant ghettos) in Kreis Sanok, in Sanok, Trepcza, and Zasław. In this manner, the Germans attempted to lure out of hiding the remaining Jews, promising them survival. About 300 Jews had remained in the Sanok ghetto. The Germans soon killed most of the Jews who emerged.  In the fall of 1942, about 100 Jews were retained to clear the area of the ghetto, but several hundred others lived in the Trepcza camp and other workplaces in Sanok, now converted into barrack camps. In mid-December 1942, the Gestapo shot remaining members of the Judenrat in the Jewish cemetery.  Also in December, the Trepcza camp was liquidated and about 700 Jews were transferred to Zasław, where they were shot the next day.  In January 1943, the remaining Jewish laborers in Sanok were concentrated in the remnant ghetto. After a few days, they were then sent to the Zasław camp. It is assumed that most were then sent to their deaths from Zasław, although the details remain unclear. 
Some Jews managed to escape the liquidation of the ghetto and go into hiding. The Germans hunted down the Jews in the nearby villages. In Bykowce, the Germans shot three Jewish escapees from the Sanok ghetto. In Dąbrówka, the Gestapo shot 14 Jews. On April 19, 1944, Stanisława Kornecka was executed by the Germans for sheltering a Jew. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Sanok include the following: El’azar Sharvit, ed., Sanok: sefer zikaron li-kehilat Sanok veha-sevivah (Tel Aviv: Irgun yots’e Sanok veha-sevivah be Yisrael, 1969) – a trans. of sections dealing with the Holocaust (pp. 327-333) are available at jewishgen.org; “Sanok” in Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Wydawn., 2004); David Bloomberg, Won’t Forgive…Can’t Forget: The Story of Jacques Graubart (Oxfordshire, England: Writersworld, 2006); Jafa Wallach, Bitter Freedom: Memoirs of a Holocaust Survivor (Schuylkill Haven, PA: Hermitage Publishers, 2006).
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Sanok can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1619, 1793, 3245, 3246, 3555, 3992); BA-L (B 162/14494); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 45; RG-15.019M, reel 11; RG-50.155*0010); USHMMPA (WS # 57831, 57842, 57843, 57848, and 57851); VHF (e.g., # 9007, 20860, 38212, 38885); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Sędziszów Małopolski 
Pre-1939: Sędziszów Małopolski, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Sedziszow Malopolski, Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Sędziszów Małopolski, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Sędziszów Małopolski is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east of Kraków. In 1921, when the town became part of the re-established Polish state, there were only 861 Jewish residents in Sędziszów Małopolski.
Soon after the invasion of Poland, German troops entered Sędziszów Małopolski on September 8, 1939. When the Germans established the Generalgouvernement in November 1939, the town became part of Kreis Debica, within Distrikt Krakau. A branch of the Security Police (Sipo-Aussendienststelle) based in Dębica organized the large Aktions against the Jews within its area of jurisdiction, including the town of Sędziszów Małopolski, assisted by the German Order Police and other auxiliary forces. 
In 1939, there were 1,000 Jewish residents in the town. In the period from 1939 to 1941, the Germans imposed a series of discriminatory measures against the local Jewish population. These included the confiscation of Jewish property, the imposition of forced “contributions”, the obligation to wear white armbands bearing a blue Star of David, and mandatory registration. In addition, the Germans prohibited the Jews from leaving the town limits and conscripted them to various kinds of compulsory hard labor. 
There is very little information regarding the fate of the Jewish population prior to the establishment of the ghetto in June 1942. A Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by a man named Faust was established and made responsible for providing the daily quotas of forced laborers, who were mainly employed in construction and clean-up work. Records of the local Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization indicate that until September 26, 1941, despite the dire situation of the Jews in the town, there was no public kitchen. This was mainly due to the difficulties encountered raising funds to restore the local synagogue, in which the kitchen was to be established. Although no epidemic of typhus broke out in Sędziszów Małopolski, poor sanitary conditions among the Jewish population forced Meilech Löw, the head of the local JSS, to request funds to buy medical supplies in January 1942.  On February 2, 1942, the public kitchen, which served around 100 free meals per day, was finally opened. However, the living conditions in the town were also affected by considerable overcrowding. By February 15, 1942, the number of Jews in Sędziszów Małopolski had reached 1,380, including many refugees who had arrived from the nearby town of Kołbuszowa. 
At the beginning of May 1942, 50 young Jews were sent to the Pustków labor camp. The Germans established an open ghetto in Sędziszów Małopolski in June 1942, in an area circumscribed by three buildings. In addition to local Jews, it very briefly held several hundred Jews from the village of Ropczyce who were concentrated there on July 23, 1942, just one day before the ghetto’s liquidation. This brought the number of Jews in the ghetto to about 1,900. The ghetto was liquidated on July 24, 1942. Approximately 400 Jews, many of them old people, children, and women from Ropczyce, were shot on the spot by members of the SS and the Gendarmerie after a selection. Their remains were buried in a mass grave in the Jewish cemetery. About 1,500 Jews were dispatched via Dębica to the extermination camp at Bełżec. Although the town was officially declared to have been “cleansed of Jews” (judenrein) following the liquidation of the ghetto, at least 19 Jews were discovered subsequently in hiding and were immediately shot. 
Sources:
Information regarding the ghetto in Sędziszów Małopolski can be found in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 280-282; E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O zagladzie żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, pp. 87-109, here pp. 87 and 95; Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 446; and Rejestr Miejsc i Faktów Zbrodni Popełnionych przez Okupanta Hitlerowskiego na Ziemiach Polskich w Latach 1939-1945: województwo rzeszowskie (Warsaw: GKBZHwP, 1984), p. 172.
Documents describing the fate of the Jews of Sędziszów Małopolskie may be found in the following archives: AŻIH (JSS 211/948); IPN (Zh III/31/35/68, g., woj. Rzeszowskie); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 45); VHF (e.g., # 1236 and 18693); and YVA (e.g., M-1/E/1412 and O-22/54).
Caterina Crisci and Alexander Kruglov
trans. Robert Haney
Sieniawa
Pre-1939: Sieniawa, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1941: Seniava, L’vov oblast’, Ukrainian SSR; 1941-1944: Sieniawa, Kreis Jaroslau, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Sieniawa is located 50 kilometers (31 miles) north-northwest of Przemyśl. In 1939, there were 1,300 Jews living in Sieniawa.  German forces briefly occupied the town in September 1939. The Soviets took over later that month, following their invasion of Poland from the east. The Soviet occupation was largely peaceful for Sieniawa’s Jews. Survivor Sally Bach recalled it as “a very good period” under the Soviets.  
Following the German recapture of Sieniawa in late June 1941, 50 to 60 Jews were arrested on charges of having co-operated with the Soviet police. Most were released after paying a ransom, but 15 people were detained and later shot. 
The Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat) chaired by Shmiryahu Schmidt, who was soon replaced by Eliyahu Gross. According to survivors, Gross was very friendly and influential with the Gestapo who oversaw the town, often bribing its members.  
On May 26, 1942, a conference of all the Judenrat chairmen in the Kreis took place in Sieniawa. The Kreishauptmann in Jarosław appointed Gross as the Kreisobmann, i.e., the president of the Presidium of the Area Council. This position held authority over all 15 Jewish councils, some of which had much larger Jewish populations. Among them were: Jarosław (the Kreis center), Łańcut, Przeworsk, Pruchnik, Landshut, Leżajsk, Grodzisko Dolne, Żołynia, Bystrowice, Markowa, Kańczuga, Czarna, and Monasterz. At the conference, Gross “introduced a work plan in the sphere of fulfilling the decrees of the German authorities, and in the social field.” Gross never exercised much of his power, and in the summer of 1942, most of the Jewish communities in the area were liquidated.
In July 1942, there were 1,800 Jews living in Sieniawa. By then, its Judenrat had distributed some clothing, heating fuel, and 20,000 złoty among the town’s Jews. No soup kitchen was organized. The Jewish population sustained itself by trading household items for food with Ukrainians, the predominant residents of the town. Jews worked in forestry, road repairs, and sanitation. 
In the summer and early autumn of 1942, several processes were taking place in Sieniawa, most of them simultaneously. Each was part of the liquidation plan for the Jews of Kreis Jaroslau. The Germans had selected Sieniawa as the main place of concentration for the Jews before their final shipment to death or labor camps. The Jews from neighboring settlements were brought into Sieniawa in the summer of 1942. A number of Jews from larger towns in the Kreis were also transferred to Sieniawa, following the liquidation of their communities. At that time, the Jews of Sieniawa were not ghettoized and there are no references to restrictions on their movement within the town.
Available sources differ, but the liquidation of the Sieniawa Jewish community probably took place on August 25, 1942. After this main Aktion, only several hundred Jews remained in Sieniawa. According to Pinkas ha-kehilot – which gives an earlier date of July 20 for the Aktion – the community was gathered in the synagogue and then sent to the Pełkinia transit camp. Many children and elderly people were murdered in and around Sieniawa during the course of this Aktion. The women were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp, while the healthy men were transferred to labor camps. The historian, E. Podhorizer-Sandel, however, dates the Aktion on August 25 and indicates that the Jews were sent on wagons to nearby Wólka Pełkińska, and from here by truck to a forest where they were shot.
The latter date seems more likely, as the local office of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), established in Sieniawa only on July 19, 1942, reported to JSS headquarters in Kraków on August 26, 1942, “for the laborers, deportees, abandoned, and children who remained [in Sieniawa], we have set up a kitchen.” It served three meals a day for 150 people, but worked to increase this output as the authorities had announced that they should expect more deportees to be resettled to Sieniawa. “We are stressing that from the entire Kries Jaroslau, Sieniawa will be the only town inhabited by Jews, the number of which cannot presently be determined,” the JSS added. 
 It was only after this first liquidation Aktion, that a closed ghetto was established on September 15, 1942 in the center and northern parts of Sieniawa. Poles were expelled from their houses, and all the Jewish inhabitants were relocated to this area. The Germans gradually fenced the ghetto area with barbed wire and constructed at least one guarded gate. A Jewish police force was organized, possibly before the ghetto’s establishment. Apart from the remaining Jews of Sieniawa, there were also Jews from Leżajsk, Łańcut, Żołynia, Grodzisk, and Kańczuga in the ghetto. 
A German Gendarme by the name of Seidel was in charge of ghetto affairs. He was assisted by the commander of a Ukrainian police force, Babak, and another Ukrainian named Kozak. 
Even after the first liquidation, when new Jews were still being brought into the ghetto from other places where the Jewish communities had just been liquidated, Gross repeatedly assured the ghetto inmates that he would protect them against deportation.  
In the course of the ghetto’s establishment, the Germans ordered the Judenrat to set up several labor camps. Gross approved the candidates for labor conscription. The first of three camps, which all lay less than 10 kilometers (6 miles) from Sieniawa, had been set up by September 11, 1942. Two hundred men and 30 women labored in forestry and lived in barracks constructed close to their work places. The Sieniawa ghetto was ordered to provide meals for them from its soup kitchen. The monthly cost was estimated at 10,000 złoty. Sieniawa Jews drained of money pleaded to the JSS in Kraków for help: “Other localities in our Kreis cannot help us either, as there are no longer any Jews there at all.” By October 26, 1942, the JSS reported 1,300 Jews living in Sieniawa’s enclosed ghetto. 
Earlier in October 1942, another massacre took place. At least eight members of the Judenrat were shot in an Aktion that some survivors described as another liquidation operation, and which ended with the murder of many ghetto inmates. A witness, Helen Gruenfeld, a relative of Gross, testified: “The president [of the Judenrat] ran out and screamed, ‘Please save my ghetto!’ And they were so drunk, the SS-men. They started shooting [at] him. There were seven shots and he begged for his life, and then all of a sudden it became quiet.” 
According to Pinkas ha-kehilot, members of the Judenrat, including Gross, were murdered when they were caught carrying furs and other valuables, which they intended to use to bribe the ‘governor [Kreishauptmann] in Jarosław,’ in exchange for cancellation of the planned dissolution of the Sieniawa ghetto. The execution took place outside the Judenrat building. Lazar Pes was then appointed as the new chairman. Bernard Schanzer further recalled that when the camps were being organized, the Germans killed all the chairmen of the Jewish councils from neighboring towns who were living in the ghetto, as well as most of their family members. 
 By November 1942, the number of Jews in the ghetto had declined to 1,100. The Judenrat and JSS were responsible for providing food to 169 laborers who were then working in the three forestry camps: in Dobra (10 kilometers (6 miles) distant), Milniki (8 kilometers (5 miles) distant), and Koty (4 kilometers (2.5 miles) away from Sieniawa). There were cases of typhus reported among the camp inmates.  
It is not clear to what extent the Jews in the camps were able to communicate with the ghetto, or what the Jews who remained in the ghetto were doing at this time. The ghetto existed until May 4, 1943. The number of inhabitants at that time and the manner of its liquidation are unknown. In the spring of 1944, an SS detachment exhumed the bodies of the people who had been murdered in Sieniawa during the German occupation, transferred them to Koniaczów, and burned them there. 
Sources:
The Sieniawa ghetto is mentioned in the following publications: Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 360-362; and E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O zagladzie żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, pp. 95-96.
The following archives were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (211/952 (JSS), 301/2200 (Relacje)); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M, (ASG)); and VHF (# 2380, # 4222, # 7563, # 24980).
Jolanta Kraemer
Skawina
Pre-1939: Skawina, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis and Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Skawina is located 15 kilometers (9 miles) southwest of Kraków. There were approximately 360 Jews living in Skawina in 1939. Many fled before the advancing German troops at the start of the September campaign; by the spring of 1940, there were only 290 Jews left in Skawina, including nine refugees.  A Polish (Blue) Police squad and a German Gendarmerie post were based in the town.
The occupying German authorities appointed Salomon Heim as the chairman of Skawina’s Jewish council (Judenrat) and Mendel Spielman as his deputy.  The Judenrat set up a self-help committee in early March 1940. Although unable to open a soup kitchen, it distributed food received from the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) in Kraków. It also required that better-situated families should provide daily meals to 10 children from poor families. A complete list of the Jewish families living in Skawina in November 1940, prepared for flour distribution, is available in the AJDC files. It includes the name and surname of the family heads, and the number of people in each family.  
In the autumn of 1940, a large number of Jews that had been expelled from Kraków moved to Skawina, nearly doubling the town’s prewar Jewish population. By mid-November 1940, 100 refugees had already been settled; and another 230 were in the process of arranging their accommodation. Each able-bodied newcomer had to register with the local Arbeitsamt (Labor Office) for work assignment. 
By the end of 1940, Jewish shops and businesses had either been closed down or taken over by non-Jewish trustees. At this time, the Judenrat stated that: “the only source of income was from forced labor.” In January 1941, 700 Jews were registered in Skawina. 
A temporary infirmary was set up for the severely ill refugees in the early spring of 1941. A Women’s Committee affiliated with the Judenrat organized a rotation among local families, who took it in turns to bring food to the in-patients to provide them with sustenance. Some patients were later transferred to Kraków. 
In April 1941, before the Passover holidays, the Gestapo and the Polish Police rounded up 150 men and women enlisted for deportation to Międzyrzecz Podlaski. The list was handed over to the Judenrat’s chairman one day in advance. A number of those listed went into hiding after learning of their planned deportation; in their place, other Jews were seized randomly. 
Available records show that by May 1941, the number of Jews in Skawina had decreased to 556.  
On May 22, 1941, the then-deputy of the Judenrat, Mendel Spielman, was appointed as its new chairman, with the approval of Kraków’s Kreishauptmann.  
The new Judenrat chairman was also appointed as the president of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) branch that was officially established by the Kraków headquarters on August 7, 1941. The JSS was located on Kolejowa Street 133. It opened a soup kitchen on August 18, 1941 at 219 Korabnicka Street. 
A Judenrat sanitation committee was soon created to prevent the spread of disease. A Jewish female doctor, Czapnicka, supervised it; she was also in charge of the clinic. The sanitation committee consisted of six people tasked with inspecting Jewish households for cleanliness, ordering vaccinations and haircuts, bedding replenishment, and floor and toilet maintenance. Poor people could use the public baths free of charge, and were ordered to do so once a week. Half of Skawina’s Jewish population was vaccinated for typhus. By May 1942, there were still no serious diseases, apart from three cases of tuberculosis. 
There were 597 Jews registered in Skawina between February and May 1942. These included some Jewish deportees from Slovakia, such as Mikuláš Liptovský, who were trying to locate relatives sent to other towns. 
In the first days of July 1942, the Jews living in Krzeszowice (renamed Kressendorf by the Germans), including those from the villages of Tenczynek, and Nowa Góra within Landgemeinde Kressendorf, as well as Jews from the separate Landgemeinden of Liszki and Czernichów, were notified of their upcoming transfer to Skawina. At the time of the transfer from Krzeszowice, a Sonderdienst squad took approximately 140 children, sick, and elderly into a forest near Tyniec, where they were forced to undress, and then shot. The victims were buried in three mass graves.
With the arrival of 222 Jews from Landgemeinde Kressendorf, Skawina’s Jewish population rose to 812. 
The newcomers from Kressendorf were followed by many more. The local government was instructed not to interfere with those Jews attempting to settle in the by now extremely overcrowded town of Skawina, “as long as it was within the town’s boundaries.”  A number of houses near the train station were emptied of Poles and Jews were housed in their place. 
Although there is no evidence that a ghetto was ever formally established, an informal open ghetto was effectively in place by August 1942, at the latest. 
On August 12, 1942, up to 1,000 Jews (among them a large number of refugees) were brought in from the liquidated ghetto in Kalwaria Zebrzydowska.  At that time, on the orders of the Arbeitsamt in Kraków, all Jews employed in agriculture in the vicinity of Skawina were released from their employment. By then an SS unit was quartered in Skawina. Its headquarters, set up in the local factory, received more and more troops. Supplementary Polish police forces were also gathered and quartered in the local school. The SS informed the town’s mayor that Skawina’s Jews were under their jurisdiction and ordered the Jews to pay three separate “contributions” in a very short time.
The Jews from Myślenice and its vicinity were brought to the Skawina ghetto on August 21, 1942. At this time the ghettoization process was complete, and Jews were no longer allowed to leave the town. Checkpoints were spread out along Skawina’s town limits; the identification of those coming in and leaving was checked. At least two Jews were killed trying to leave the town. 
On August 29, 1942, the ghetto’s inhabitants were informed that they were to be deported “to the East for work” and were to report to the market square. In the process of assembling, those slow to arrive or discovered in hiding were killed. The night before, groups of Jews were rounded up and kept in the so-called Catholic House and the new slaughterhouse. The Germans announced shortly afterwards that Poles were forbidden to enter the market square until noon the next day, Sunday, August 30, when the liquidation of the Skawina ghetto would be complete.
The following morning, the deportation commenced with the tormenting of those Jews who showed up with the heaviest luggage. They were ordered to run to the Catholic House and back, and then to the train station and back. Children’s carriages and luggage were collected in front of the town hall, after which a selection took place. Small children, infants, the old, and handicapped were loaded onto trucks. All of them were taken to the so-called Pobory Forest and shot on the edge of a previously dug mass grave. Polish workers serving in the German Construction Service (Baudienst) were later forced to bury them.
The remainder of the Jews was divided into two groups. An unknown number of healthy men were ordered to one side of the square and then loaded on trains destined for the Płaszów labor camp. Women and youths over 12 years old were taken to the other side and then sent on freight cars to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
An intensive search for escapees from the ghetto was conducted following its liquidation; e.g. four Jews were shot on September 1, 1942; six Jewish men, all with the same surname – Kunstlinger – were shot on September 2; 17 Skawina Jews were murdered on September 3; and another 16 on September 30. 
Sources:
The ghetto in Skawina is briefly mentioned in E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O zagladzie żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, p. 96; more information on conditions for the Jews concentrated in Skawina can be found in Bruno Shatyn, A Private War: Surviving in Poland on False Papers, 1941-1945, (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1985).
The following archival sources were used in this entry: AŻIH (210/632, 211/965-966, 301/599, 301/799, 301/4470, 301/4572, 301/4720, and 301/5322); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), 210/632 (Skawina); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 46, 211/965-966 (Skawina)); and VHF (# 28035-3, # 2480, and # 17120).
Jolanta Kraemer
Słomniki
Pre-1939: Słomniki, town, Kielce województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Slomniki, Kreis Miechow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Słomniki, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Słomniki is located about 20 kilometers (12.5 miles) north-northeast of Kraków. In 1921, the Jewish population was 1,460, out of a total population of 4,797.
German forces occupied Słomniki on September 6, 1939. A number of Jews, mainly young men, fled eastward just before the occupation. However, many subsequently returned in the winter of 1939-1940.
On October 26, 1939, Słomniki became incorporated into Kreis Miechow in Distrikt Krakau within the Generalgouvernement. The German authorities imposed a series of anti-Jewish measures, including the confiscation of property, a curfew, and subsequently a prohibition on Jews leaving the town. A Jewish council (Judenrat) was established headed by Israel Moshe Bialebroda. The Jewish council had to supply forced laborers to the Germans for clearing snow, road construction, quarrying, and draining swamps. Jews with means were able to pay for substitutes to replace them on forced labor details.  According to Pinkas ha-kehilot, the German commissar of the labor office in Miechów, Beckman, was notable for his brutality; on one visit to Słomniki, he forced Rabbi Huberband to remove all the holy books from the synagogue and burn them in front of the building.
In the period up to the end of 1941, the Jewish population of Słomniki increased by up to 1,000 refugees, including a number of people displaced from Kraków. The community organized public assistance and a soup kitchen for the needy. In the winter of 1940-1941, about 100 young men from Słomniki were sent to a labor camp in Nowy Targ.
Probably in the spring of 1942, the German Security Police selected a few of the most prominent Jews of Słomniki and took them to Miechów, where they were killed.  In the first half of 1942, a unit of Jewish Police was created in Słomniki, which served under the Judenrat.
In late April or early May 1942, the Germans rounded up about 150 able-bodied Jews in Słomniki and deported them to work at two camps near Kraków. Some worked at the Fliegerhorstkommando, agricultural section, in Rakowice and others were sent to the Siemens factory camp in Plaszów. The Słomniki Judenrat managed to send them small amounts of money, food, and clothing for a few weeks in the summer of 1942.  According to Roman Ohrenstein, who was among those included in this deportation, up to this date there was no ghetto in the town. The Jews received bread in accordance with ration cards, but had to barter possessions with local farmers in order to supplement this meager diet. They continued to live in their own homes, but all the decrees meant that living conditions were “just as bad as a ghetto.”  
The first large-scale deportation Aktion from Słomniki, which was also the first from Kreis Miechow, took place on June 4-8, 1942. JSS records indicate that at this time about 1,200 Jews were deported and some 800 to 900 Jews remained in the town.  On the night of June 4, hundreds of SS men aided by Ukrainian auxiliaries and Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the town. The German authorities ordered the Judenrat to prepare a list of the Jews who lived in the town’s center and its eastern part. That night, Jews from these districts were forcibly evicted using vicious dogs and imprisoned in the synagogue and two Polish schools. Those unable to walk were killed on the spot. 
After being held in the schools and the synagogue for three days without food or water, on June 8, the Jews were then transported on trucks to Prokocim, just to the southeast of Kraków, where they were held in the local soccer field for a few hours. Here they were ordered to hand over their valuables. A selection was conducted and a few dozen able-bodied Jews were sent to the Plaszów labor camp. The old, sick, and frail were also selected out and killed nearby. The bulk of the Jews were then deported by rail to the Bełżec extermination camp on cattle cars, together with other Jews from Kraków, where the first large Aktion had commenced on May 30 and was now concluding.   
Following this Aktion, about 900 Jews were still living in the western part of town. At the end of June 1942, the Kreishauptmann in Miechów issued a decree on the establishment of “Jewish quarters” (Jüdischer Wohnbezirke) in Kreis Miechow. According to German trial materials, this order instructed the Jews of Michalowice (and probably also other nearby villages) to move to the “ghetto” in Słomniki by July 15, 1942.  The resettlement of the Jews of Michalowice was conducted in a brutal fashion by the head of the Gestapo Aussendienststelle in Miechów, SS-Untersturmführer and Kriminalobersekretär Bayerlein, such that a number of Jews were shot in the streets of the village.  JSS records confirm that the Kreishauptmann informed the Jews of Słomniki to expect the resettlement of about 450 Jews from the neighboring villages on July 13-14, 1942. Then on July 21, JSS records indicate that initially the mayor of Słomniki did not want to accept these new arrivals. However, he agreed, once an official from the office of the Kreishauptmann gave permission for them to be housed with the other Jews within the borders of the “eventual Jewish quarter,” and even permitted some to be housed temporarily in other parts of town, once the official had stated that “there were no plans to establish a [permanent] ghetto in Słomniki.”  Thus the order announcing the establishment of a Jewish quarter in Słomniki appears to reflect the town’s use as a temporary concentration point for Jews of the region prior to their deportation, rather than the establishment of a formal ghetto for Słomniki’s Jews. Its main purpose was probably to deceive Jews passing through Słomniki about the real nature of the deportation Aktion. Nonetheless, most of the native Jews of Słomniki were by now concentrated in the western part of the town, due to the manner in which the first deportation Aktion was conducted.
On August 2, 1942, the soup kitchen in Słomniki was reopened after the disruptions caused by the first deportation. The Gestapo chief in Miechów, Bayerlein, engaged in selling “certificates” to the increasingly anxious Jews for a price of 10,000 złoty, which were supposed to protect people from deportation; however, during the next deportation Aktion, these certificates proved to be worthless. By mid-August, the Germans had established a transit camp near Słomniki, consisting of a specially fenced area in a field, near the flour mill on the Szerniewa River. On August 20, 1942, most of the remaining Jews of Słomniki were transferred to this area, where Jews from other nearby towns were also brought successively during the last days of August and the first days of September. Among other places, Jews were brought there from Charsznica, Skalbmierz, Koszyce, Miechów, Proszowice, and Skala.  Many Jews were murdered by the Ukrainian and Lithuanian escorts during these transports, and eventually the transit camp held about 6,000 to 8,000 Jews, including about 1,000 from Słomniki. In the camp, the inmates were held under terrible conditions, exposed to the elements. Only some 200 Jews, including members of the Judenrat, were allowed to remain in Słomniki. 
The Słomniki Judenrat managed to organize some food and water for the thousands of Jews crammed into the camp.  However, more than 40 people died during the first four days and many others contracted dysentery and typhus. On September 6-7, 1942, the Germans and their auxiliaries liquidated the camp. About 1,000 people were selected and sent to forced labor camps, and hundreds of the infirm and children were shot and buried in nearby pits, some being buried alive. The remaining Jews were loaded onto cattle cars and sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
The remaining Jews in Słomniki were subsequently joined by other Jews who had evaded the roundups in hiding. At this time, the Germans and their collaborators were scouring the region for any Jews who had escaped, shooting those they found on the spot. 
In November 1942, the Germans shot the last remaining 200 Jews in Słomniki in the Chodów Forest, along with a number of Jewish fugitives captured in the area. Only a few Jews from Słomniki managed to survive until the end of the German occupation in 1945.
Sources: 
Information on the fate of the Jews in Słomniki during the Holocaust can be found in these publications: Abraham Wein, Bracha Freundlich, and Wila Orbach, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 7, Lublin and Kielce (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1999), pp. 358-362; Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1998), vol. 23, Lfd. Nr. 619; and Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), pp. 241-242, 665-666, 1190, 1200.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/976 (JSS), 301/1695, 1732, 1808); VHF, (e.g., # 20661, 27514, and 27994); and YVA (M-1/E/494).
Martin Dean
Sokołów Małopolski
Pre-1939: Sokołów Małopolski, town, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Sokolow, Kreis Reichshof (Rzeszów), Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Sokołów Małopolski, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Sokołów Małopolski is located 27 kilometers (17 miles) northwest of Rzeszów. On the eve of World War II, there were 1,600 Jews living there. 
Following the German occupation of the town in September 1939, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was appointed in the fall. Leon Kaufmann became its chairman. One of the Judenrat’s main functions was providing laborers for the Germans. 
By December 1939, over 200 Jews who had been deported by the German authorities from Łódź were transferred to Sokołów Małopolski via Rzeszów. Upon their arrival, Sokołów’s Jews spontaneously set up a Committee for the Support of Deportees. A soup kitchen opened, distributing breakfasts and dinners. The Judenrat had taken charge of the Committee by January 1940. 
In March 1940, there were 1,700 Jews living in Sokołów, including 270 deportees from other areas. The number of deportees fluctuated, with several groups of Jews arriving and then leaving Sokołów; by June 1940, the number had fallen to approximately 150. 
Those Jews who remained in Sokołów worked for a construction company on various projects on and around the market square. Civilian supervisors named Jeschko, Lindner, and Schäfer often beat these laborers. In winter, Jewish labor was used to clear the streets of snow. 
The Judenrat closed the soup kitchen in the summer of 1940, immediately after the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) stopped sending money. Before this, the AJDC had questioned the Judenrat’s policy of not charging for meals and overspending on provisions (bought on the black market), instead of attempting to buy food at the maximum prices fixed by the German authorities in their efforts to prevent speculators; in fact, Jewish charitable organizations were still eligible to buy some food under these regulations.
In September 1940, an AJDC inspector criticized the Judenrat chairman Kaufmann for being “a flincher,” taking the easiest way out by simply refusing to reopen the soup kitchen. From then on, the Judenrat only distributed cash, which forced the poor to buy food themselves at inflated prices, whereas the Judenrat could have negotiated to pay bulk prices and also saved on fuel costs by operating a communal kitchen. The AJDC did not renew its support, as it considered its money was being spent unwisely.  
By February 1941, a branch of the welfare organization known as the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), with its headquarters in Kraków, opened in Sokołów. It took over the provision of social aid from the Judenrat, which now included Doctor Józef Weissberg, Symche Halpern, and Awadje Breselod. Continuing the politics of the Judenrat, the JSS chose to distribute cash instead of organizing a soup kitchen. Close to half of its 1941 budget was spent supplying conscripted laborers with food and clothing. 
According to a JSS report of June 1941, a total of 400 Jews worked in labor camps outside the Kreis, most of them likely in Górna. 
In September 1941, all Jews from villages surrounding Raniżów and Sokołów, including Wola Raniżowska, Zielonka, Staniszewskie, Mazury, and Górna, were deported to Sokołów and Głogów Małopolski. A group of 250 people, mostly farmers, resettled in Sokołów, the remainder in Głogów. Those who were sent to Sokołów had been working at the open labor camp in Górna; their resettlement was to rationalize their labor there.  One Jewish survivor, who arrived in Sokołów in September 1941, described the town at that time as “a kind of a ghetto” overcrowded with refugees, but unguarded, unfenced, and with no gates. He claimed that there was no hunger and the town’s Jews could still go out and buy food.  At this time, the German Landkomissar Twardon, residing in Kolbuszowa, ordered the Kolbuszowa Judenrat to move 25 Jewish families to Sokołów and Głogów.  
A hospital was probably not established in the village until 1942. Towarzystwo Ochony Zdrowia (the Society for the Protection of Health) disinfected dirty apartments from December 1940. One source claims that there was never a serious epidemic in Sokołów and the death rate was not significantly above average. However, on December 20, 1941, the police decree of the Kreishaumptmann Heinz Ehaus announced Strzyżów, Niebylec, and Sokołów Małopolski as quarantined areas, and all traffic in and out was halted. The penalty for disobeying the order was a 1,000 złoty fine or prison time. There is no information as to when the quarantine was lifted. 
At the beginning of 1942, the Judenrat organized linen-sewing, carpentry, and agricultural courses for the youth. Although the courses began in February 1942, the Judenrat subsequently failed to establish workshops that might have offered people some form of employment and therefore perhaps security against deportation for forced labor.
The German authorities established a ghetto in Sokołów on April 27, 1942. It covered approximately 500 square meters (almost 600 square yards) and included Kupiecka and Kochanowskiego streets, as well as part of Piłsudskiego. The Poles living there had to leave their homes. Landkomissar Twardon became the commandant in charge of the Sokołów ghetto. Marcuse, a refugee, was head of the Jewish Police.  Survivor testimonies disagree on whether the Sokołów ghetto was physically enclosed or not. 
By May 1942, the ghetto had 3,000 inhabitants. The local Arbeitsamt (Labor Office) registered all newcomers aged between 14 and 60 years old. In May 1942, according to Gazeta Żydowska, approximately 800 Jews worked daily at the Luftwaffe barracks in Górno; however, it is not clear if all of them were from the Sokołów ghetto. At that time, the commander of the Górno outpost offered dinners to Jewish laborers at 0.40 złoty each. Another 100 to 120 Jews worked in Sokołów cleaning the town and repairing roads.
The Reichshof Gestapo arrived in Sokołów in early May 1942 and shot several Jews whom they believed to be communists as part of a wider Aktion throughout Distrikt Krakau.
The liquidation of the Sokołów ghetto took place in July 1942. German police officers arrived in Sokołów and shot around 30 ghetto residents, following a selection. Approximately 200 Jews were relocated to Głogów; Jewish professionals were sent to Rzeszów. The remaining Jews were given only two days to transfer to the Rzeszów ghetto. Forty Jews found hiding were murdered in four separate shootings in the forest near the village of Pogwizdów Nowy.  
Along with those expelled from other towns, Sokołów’s Jews were put into shacks outside the Rzeszów ghetto. All were most likely sent to the Bełżec extermination camp in the course of the July 1942 deportations. 
In the summer of 1943, Wehrmacht soldiers shot three Jews and executed four Poles accused of hiding them. All were shot and buried on the grounds of Sokołów’s elementary school. According to a survivor’s testimony, one Jewish man was killed in Sokołów after the end of the war, as he was accused of having been a member of the Jewish Police; an allegation that the survivor deemed to be false. 
Sources:
There is no single publication describing in detail the fate of the Jews of Sokołów Małopolski. Brief descriptions of the destruction of the community can be found in: Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), p. 181; and Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 276-278.
Documentation and testimonies can be found in the following archives: AŻIH, (210/645 (AJDC); 211/983 and 211/931 (JSS); and 301/4968 (Relacje)); USHMM (RG-15.019M (ASG); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS)); USHMMPA (CD no. 0409, WS # N64867); and VHF (# 30185).
Jolanta Kraemer

Stary Sącz
Pre-1939: Stary Sącz, town, Nowy Sącz powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Alt-Sandez, Kreis Neu-Sandez, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Stary Sącz, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Stary Sącz is located about 85 kilometers (53 miles) southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II there were about 434 Jews living in the town. 
German armed forces occupied Stary Sącz on September 5, 1939. At the end of October, the town became part of Kreis Neu-Sandez (Nowy Sącz) administered by Kreishauptmann Dr. Reinhard Busch. An office of the Border Police (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, or GPK) was established in Nowy Sącz and headed from 1940 by SS-Obersturmführer Heinrich Hamann. A unit of Polish (Blue) Police, stationed in Stary Sącz, was commanded by a Viennese official named Neumann. The Germans conscripted Jews for forced labor, mainly cleaning streets, washing latrines, and performing other degrading work. A curfew was imposed on the Jews. A Judenrat was established in the town in the fall of 1939. 
Up to the beginning of 1940, Jews were permitted to remain in their own houses, unless the house was on one of the main streets, from which all Jews were evicted, as Jews were not permitted to use them. In 1940, the Germans confiscated Jewish houses and businesses. At the end of 1940 and in the first half of 1941, the Kreishauptmann ordered that all Jews living in the smaller towns and villages must move to one of five major towns in the Kreis: Nowy Sącz, Stary Sącz, Limanowa, Mszana Dolna, or Grybów. By 1942, leaving the residential area without permission was punishable by death. 
In 1941, the Germans began to concentrate the Jews in one area on the outskirts of Stary Sącz. Jews from nearby villages and smaller towns, including Krynica, Stadło, Piwniczna, and Rytro, were brought into the town. About 1,000 Jews lived in the crowded Jewish area in the northern part of town, which became an open ghetto. It was administered by the Judenrat and policed internally by the Jewish Police, with Polish (Blue) Police acting as external guards. Due to the prohibition on leaving the ghetto and the meager food rations supplied, many Jews engaged in black market activities. The Germans also prohibited Jews from religious observance, but some Jews held clandestine religious services. 
According to a report by the Stary Sącz branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) for the period from June 26 to July 15, 1941, the Judenrat had registered 1,024 Jews, of which more than half had arrived since the start of the occupation. These included 33 merchants, 25 skilled workers, 4 farmers, 5 self employed individuals, 43 forced laborers, and 257 unemployed. Eighty-five Jews were receiving aid. Based on the community kitchen’s report for October 1941, the kitchen distributed paid and unpaid meals to 231 Jews, but 298 more people had applied for assistance. 
The Germans intensified their persecution of the Jews during 1941. On September 13, 1941, the Germans shot 20 Jewish women in the Miejska Góra Forest.  On December 13, 1941, a renewed order was issued commanding Jews to wear armbands with the Star of David. The armband had to specify the person’s last name, address, and town of residence.  At the end of December 1941, the Germans ordered that the Jews surrender any fur items and hard currency. 
On January 6, 1942, the Kreishauptmann announced that Jews could not leave their area of residence without the approval of either his office (Kreisamt) or the labor office (Arbeitsamt). Jews had to obtain an approval from the Kreishauptmann for travel by rail. In the spring or summer of 1942, the Jews from the Nowy Sącz Kreis were ordered to hand over to the Germans a contribution of 140,000 złoty, furs, large amounts of tea and coffee, and 500 pots. Somehow the Judenrat in Stary Sącz managed to scrape together their share of this harsh German demand.  
On August 14, 1942, the Germans ordered conscripted Poles of the construction service (Baudienst) to dig a large ditch in a field near the Poprad River. The Germans sent an order via the Judenrat that all Jews must assemble at the cattle market in the early hours of August 15, 1942. The Order Police and Gestapo from Nowy Sącz carried out the Aktion. A selection was made, in the course of which at least 70 people who were elderly, sick, or otherwise unfit for work were sent to one side. They were taken to the mass grave near the Poprad River and shot. The Germans also selected about 140 people from the mass of Jews for three labor detachments, issuing them special work cards stamped by the GPK in Nowy Sącz. One group consisting of 35 people was taken on trucks to perform forced labor at the Hobag-Werke in Rytro just to the south of Stary Sącz. A second group, also of 35 people, became the clean-up group (Aufräumkommando) that remained in Stary Sącz to sort the clothes and other possessions of the Jews. Another work group consisting of 70 men was marched off to the Piekło ghetto in Nowy Sącz. The remaining group of more than 300 Jews was escorted by Jewish Police to the closed ghetto on Kazimierza Street in Nowy Sącz.  The Germans deported the majority of the Jews from the two Nowy Sącz ghettos to the Bełżec extermination camp between August 24 and August 28, 1942.
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Stary Sącz include: “Stary Sącz,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 278-280; and Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 1998), vol. 24, Lfd. Nr. 635, pp. 269-484 (LG Bochum 16 Ks 1/65, verdict against Heinrich Hamann and others).
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Stary Sącz can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1895); IPN; USHMM (1995.A.228; Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 47; RG-02.070*01; RG-15.019M, reel 4; RG-50.106*0008; RG-50.002*0156); VHF (# 291, 9874, 10710, 11490, 20997); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Strzyżów
Pre-1939: Strzyżów, town, Rzeszów powiat, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1944: Strzyzow, Kreis Reichshof (Rzeszów), Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Strzyżów, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Strzyżów is located about 32 kilometers (20 miles) southwest of Rzeszów. On the eve of World War II, there were 1,300 Jewish residents in the town.
On September 8, 1939, German forces occupied Strzyżów. Maltreatment, plundering, and killings began almost immediately.
A detachment of German Order Police was established in Strzyżów under the command of Hauptmann Otto Koeller and his deputy Wilhelm Kopf. Their subordinates included: Hugo Drewitz, Hans Hoffmann, and Wiktor Waszek (Waschek). The latter was especially sadistic toward Jews and was sentenced to 10 years in prison by Rzeszów’s Provincial Court after the war. Hauptmann Koeller often carried out executions himself; Polish partisans shot him in Zaborów on July 3, 1944.
A Jewish council (Judenrat) was established by the new authorities and was chaired by Abraham Braw. The Jewish council included: Yacov (Jakub) Rosen, Aaron Deutsch, Elimelech Waldman, and a manufacturer from Łódź, Zygmunt Schinagiel. By May 1940, Avigdor Diamant was appointed the Judenrat’s treasurer, and by November 1940, Nussbaum was also included on the Council. Besides Strzyżów proper, the Judenrat was also responsible for the following settlements: Bonarówka, Żyznów, Wysoka, Żarnowa, Grodzisko, and Łętownia.
Itzhok Berglass, the author of the chapter on the Holocaust in the Strzyżów yizkor book who actually spent the war years in Russia, reports that the Judenrat behaved decently towards the town’s Jews, doing all that it could to ameliorate the impact of German decrees. Of the two Jewish Police in Strzyżów, only one extorted money from his fellow Jews. 
On December 15, 1939, the Kreishauptmann in Reichshof sent 247 refugees to Strzyżów, most of which originally were from Łódź and Kalisz. A commission for refugees was set up within the Judenrat; however, it soon ran into debt trying to provide for their sustenance and housing. The numerous sick among the refugees generated further costs at the local pharmacy and with a private doctor. A few patients had to be sent to the general hospital in Rzeszów. By the end of January 1940, over 60 of them had left Strzyżów.
           In the following months the number of refugees steadily diminished by about 20 people a month, as newcomers chose to leave Strzyżów in order to join their families in other places in the Generalgouvernement, or were simply forced to leave owing to the deterioration of living conditions in the town. The Strzyżów Judenrat provided them with funds for their journeys.
By April 1940, there were 1,238 Jews (i.e. approximately 210 families) in Strzyżów; only 140 of them were refugees and deportees. Among them there were 34 Jews from places in Germany (including Stuttgart, Cologne, and Hamburg) and Upper Silesia. In July 1940, only 126 refugees remained in Strzyżów, half of the original number. 
By June 1940, 60 to 70 percent of Jewish-owned shops in Strzyżów had been closed down. Jews were no longer receiving their ration cards. Prices of food were high; e.g. a two (4.4 pounds) loaf of bread cost 5 złoty. The Strzyżów Judenrat was responsible for sending local Jews to perform forced labor. In the autumn of 1940, 140 of them worked daily.  
On October 2, 1940, the community was informed by Kreishauptmann Ehaus to prepare for the arrival of another 80 deportees from Rzeszów. The Judenrat had a problem housing them, as German companies operating in Strzyżów were demanding more and more space. 
By November 1940, there were 1,240 Jews living in Strzyżów, including approximately 200 deportees (among them now, 58 from Kraków). Out of the total number of Jewish residents, the Judenrat estimated that 220 were less than 18 years old. A soup kitchen that issued breakfasts consisting of one roll and a glass of milk was opened for approximately 120 children daily; it operated only between October 1940 and April 1941.  
By June 1941, 190 Strzyżów Jews were being conscripted for labor a few days a week. They worked for two German companies: the Organisation Todt (OT) and Kirchhof. Both companies provided meager food rations and some wages, but the latter had a reputation for mistreating people. Some poorer Jews volunteered to work for food. The labor included paving roads, building tunnels, stone quarrying, and unloading freight. Jews were also forced to remove tombstones from the Jewish cemeteries to pave the market place, and then to level them to create public space. Besides Strzyżów’s Jews, 60 Jewish laborers from the Czudec and Niebylec gminas were added to the road construction brigades. Only a few Jewish men from Strzyżów were sent to labor camps during the German occupation, those camps being at Biesiadka and Pustków. 
That summer, there were 32 Jewish businesses still operating, comprising mainly tailors, tinsmiths, and bakers. Apart from their owners, they employed another eight sales assistants. All Jewish farmers (a total of five families) were still able to sustain themselves from agriculture. In June 1941, the community numbered 1,243. 
After several outbreaks of disease in Strzyżów in the autumn of 1941, the German authorities ordered the opening of a public bath that cost an estimated at 15,000 złoty, as the building had already been partially torn down to widen the street. On December 20, 1941, Kreishauptmann Ehaus announced that Strzyżów, Niebylec and Sokołów Małopolski were quarantine areas, and all traffic was halted. By February 1942, the bath had not yet been opened. There is no information as to when the quarantine was lifted, but the material situation of the Jews deteriorated rapidly. 
On December 17, 1941, the Kreishauptmann in Reichshof ordered the establishment of Jewish quarters in the Kreis, setting dates for them to be closed. In Rzeszów, the closing order was effective on January 10, 1942; whereas for the remainder of the Kreis, it was February 1, 1942. Soon after the latter date, an unfenced ghetto was announced for Strzyżów’s Jews. None of the available sources mention that Jews had to move to a designated area, therefore, they were probably allowed to remain where they were living. This, and the fact that Jews had been forbidden to leave Strzyżów since mid-1940, meant that their situation did not change dramatically with the ghetto’s establishment, especially since the recent quarantine measures had already largely cut them off from the outside world.
In the summer of 1942, Strzyżów’s Judenrat tried to halt the expulsion order to the Rzeszów ghetto. Hauptmann Koeller promised to delay the deportation for a few grams of gold. Strzyżów’s Jews managed to collect it with the help of the Jews of Krosno. But the moment the bribe was delivered, the Germans set the date for the deportation Aktion. 
German forces probably liquidated the Strzyżów ghetto on June 26-28, 1942, as most of the ghettos in the Kreis were emptied at this time and their residents transferred to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
It is known, however, that, although there was a train station in Strzyżów, its Jews were deported to Rzeszów on carts, for which Hauptmann Koeller ordered them to pay. Tadeusz Szetela, a Polish Catholic and resident of Strzyżów, remembers how peasants with their wagons arrived in the town square. Jews loaded their belongings onto the wagons, as they were allowed to take everything with them, and quickly headed towards Rzeszów, because the Germans had announced that any Jew found in the town after 6:00 P.M. would be shot on the spot. On the way to Rzeszów, the elderly and informed were killed by the Germans.  
The bulk of Strzyżów’s Jews were most likely sent to the Bełżec extermination camp in July 1942, during the deportations from the Rzeszów ghetto. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Strzyżów include the following: Itzhok Berglas and Shlomo Yahalomi-Diamand, eds., The Book of Stryzow and Vicinity, trans. Harry Langsam (Los Angeles: “Natives of Stryzow Societies” in Israel and the Diaspora, 1990). An unpublished work dealing with the history and the persecution of the Jews in Strzyżów was also consulted in preparing this entry: Zofia Rusek and Danuta Skóra, “Społeczność żydowska w dawnym Strzyżowie i okolicy – historia i wspomnienia” (Strzyżów, 2006).
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Strzyżów can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (210/663 (AJDC); 211/925, 932, 933, and 995 (JSS); 301/899 (Relacje)); IPN (Dsn 13/11/68/“W” 922); USHMM (RG-15.019M (ASG), reel 11; Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reels 44 and 47; Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)); USHMMPA (WS # N64867); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa and Jolanta Kraemer
Tarnobrzeg
Pre-1939: Tarnobrzeg, town and powiat center, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernment; post-1998: powiat center, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Tarnobrzeg is located about 140 kilometers (87.5 miles) northeast of Kraków. In 1939, around 2,800 Jews were living in Tarnobrzeg. 
In mid-September 1939, German armed forces occupied the town. Within a week of their arrival, the initial German military administration introduced a program of forced labor for the Jews, which involved road repairs and other heavy manual labor, accompanied by beatings.  In October 1939, Tarnobrzeg was incorporated into Kreis Debica, within Distrikt Krakau in the Generalgouvernement. The office of the Security Police and SD in Dębica was primarily responsible for the implementation of anti-Jewish Aktions in the Kreis, assisted by forces of the German Order Police (Schutzpolizei and Gendarmerie) and the Polish collaborationist or Blue Police. 
In September 1939, immediately following the occupation of the town, soldiers of the Wehrmacht killed five Jews.  By the end of September 1939, a number of Jews from neighboring towns and other Jewish refugees began to concentrate in Tarnobrzeg. In October 1939, the Germans ordered all the Jews to assemble in the marketplace (Rynek), bringing with them all their valuable belongings. More than 4,000 people gathered in the Rynek; members of the SS lined the Jews up in rows, at the end of which there was a table manned by a German officer. The Jews were then robbed of all their valuable possessions and brutally beaten. They were stripped naked, medically examined by a doctor, and forced to sign a document, declaring their voluntary evacuation from the town.  Subsequently the Jews were divided into groups of 500 to 600 people and were marched toward Radomyśl nad Sanem, just across the San River, more than 35 kilometers (22 miles) to the east. After marching for three days in the pouring rain, those who arrived at the riverbank were forced onto rafts by members of the Gestapo and pushed into the water. Many people drowned and those who turned back seeking help, including women and children, were shot at by the Gestapo. During this expulsion Aktion, dozens of Jews were killed or drowned in the river. Most made it across to Radomyśl, but soon were forced to move on in the direction of Lwów, as the area around Radomyśl was about to be handed over to the Germans. A few hundred of the Jewish expellees from Tarnobrzeg subsequently returned to the town in the period up to the summer of 1941. Most of those who remained under Soviet rule were deported to the Soviet interior in 1940 or 1941, an action which may have saved their lives. 
In Tarnobrzeg, the Kreishauptmann ordered the formation of a Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by Aron Tannenbaum. Its main task was the allocation of Jews for forced labor, repairing the road from Tarnobrzeg to Cmielów. The Jews worked for a private firm and were taken to the site each day in motorized transport. They also received wages for their work, which enabled them to buy some food from the peasants. The Germans took the synagogue and the Bet Midrash and used them for storage purposes.  In November 1940, the Jewish council issued a desperate appeal for help to the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) based in Kraków, as the Jewish population in Tarnobrzeg consisted mainly of deportees, who had no means to repair their apartments, and had to live under almost inhuman conditions. Aid was also needed to buy food and clothing.  In February 1941, 320 Jews were reportedly living in the town. 
According to the yizkor book, the Jews were not confined within an enclosed ghetto, but lived in a Jewish quarter (Judenviertel) or open ghetto, which consisted of part of the market square and some of the houses behind it.  According to one source, the ghetto was created in June 1941. Toward the end of 1941 and in the first half of 1942, the number of residents increased due to an influx of Jews evacuated from towns such as Jarosław, Rozwadów, and the surrounding villages. Around this time, one Jew was shot for being outside the town without permission. Another Jew was shot in the street by the SS. It is estimated that about 12 Jews were shot altogether before the ghetto’s liquidation. 
In July 1942, the Germans liquidated the open ghetto in Tarnobrzeg. Rumors of an imminent deportation spread when the Jews from nearby Grębów were brought to Tarnobrzeg and locked in the synagogue. Fearing the worst, the Jews of Tarnobrzeg prayed, or sought to escape or hide. However, all escape routes were already cut off by the SS. On July 19, in the early hours of the morning, the SS and Gendarmerie drove the Jews out of their houses and conducted a selection. The elderly and sick people were taken to the old Jewish cemetery, where they were killed. The remaining Jews were escorted in the pouring rain initially to the town of Baranów Sandomierski, and then subsequently, on July 21-22, they were sent from there to the ghetto in Dębica. On July 24, most of the remaining Jews from Tarnobrzeg were included in the transport from Dębica  to the extermination camp in Bełżec. 
The available sources also mention a Jewish forced labor camp in Tarnobrzeg established in the spring of 1941. It was located in the rabbinate and a nearby barracks on Szeroka Street, and housed between 40 and several hundred inmates. The workers were mainly involved in road construction for the Bermann Company. Polish sources date the liquidation of this camp in the fall of 1942, but the survivor, Don Spira, recalls being transferred from the Tarnobrzeg labor camp to another camp in Mielec in August or September 1942. 
Sources:
Further information on the history and the fate of the Jewish population of Tarnobrzeg can be found in the following publications: Y.Y. Fleisher, ed., Kehilat Tarnobrzeg-Dzikow (Galicia ha-ma-aravit) (Tel Aviv: Irgun Yotse Tarnubzig-Dzikuv be-Yisrael, 1973); Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 191-194.
Documentation on the persecution and destruction of the Jewish community of Tarnobrzeg can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/ 242, 3212, and 3473); USHMM (RG-15.019M, reel 11; and Acc.1997.A.0124, reel 47 (AŻIH, JSS, 211/1015)); VHF (# 3189 and 25386); and YVA (e.g., M-1/E/2395).
Caterina Crisci
Tarnów
Pre-1939: Tarnów, city, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Tarnow, Kreis center, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Tarnów, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Tarnów is located about 90 kilometers (56 miles) east of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, about 25,000 Jews (45 percent of the city’s population) were residing in the city.
German armed forces occupied the city on September 7, 1939. Ernst Kundt became the first Kreishauptmann, with Walter Heinrich as his deputy. In December 1940, Ludwig Stitzinger replaced Kundt as Kreishauptmann, to be succeeded in January 1942 by Dr. Kipke. The headquarters of the Gestapo, Order Police, and Sonderdienst were all in the city as it was the Kreis center. On September 9-11, 1939, the Germans burned down all the synagogues and shtiblekh (prayer houses) in Tarnów. By an order issued on October 20, 1939, the Jews of Tarnów had to wear the Star of David on their clothes. In November 1939, Jewish bank accounts were blocked; on November 12, 1939, the Germans ordered Jews to mark their businesses and the entrances to cafes and restaurants with a white Star of David painted on the buildings. The penalty for disobeying the order was ten years imprisonment and a fine; after the creation of the ghetto, the penalty was death. Jews aged 14 to 60 had to enlist for forced labor. Jewish schools and institutions were closed. In the first weeks of the war, many Jews fled to the Soviet occupation zone. 
In November 1939, the Germans appointed a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Tarnów. Initially, it was chaired by a former head of the Jewish community, Dr. Józef Offner, who quickly resigned. The next chairman, Dawid Lenkowicz, and another Judenrat member, Ruwen Waksman, escaped to Lwów. A new Judenrat was appointed in 1940, headed by Dr. Szlomo Goldberg and Dr. Wolf Schenkel, who were both arrested by the Germans and sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp. Eventually, Artur Volkman became chairman of the Judenrat. The Judenrat was entrusted with preparing lists of Jews for forced labor and handling social issues. It also provided assistance to inmates of the Pustków labor camp. 
From the beginning of January 1940, Jews were prohibited from moving to other towns, traveling, or using the main streets. They were restricted from entering districts north of Krakowska and Wałowa streets and west of Brodzińskiego Street. In time, they were also prohibited from looking out of their windows onto certain streets. Jews had to clear the streets of snow and garbage. In April 1940, Jews were forbidden to enter public parks; and on April 17, 1940, a curfew was imposed on the Jews, who could remain outside only until 9:00 P.M. In the spring of 1940, the Germans demanded a ransom of 500,000 złoty from the Jewish community, which it managed to collect in the hope of easing the restrictions. In June 1940, the Germans publicly destroyed Jewish prayer shawls and religious books. The Jews were prohibited from performing the ritual slaughter of animals. In the summer of 1940, the Jews were assembled in the town’s square while the Germans plundered their homes. On June 13, 1940, the Germans arrested 753 men in Tarnów, among them five prominent Jews. The next day, 728 men were sent on a cattle train to Auschwitz. The “Tarnovian” prisoners were tattooed with numbers from 31 to 758 and marked the beginning of the Auschwitz concentration camp. Almost 200 of them survived; none of these survivors were Jews. 
On August 7, 1940, the wealthier Jews who lived on Krakowska and Wałowa streets received an order to move out of their houses within 12 hours and move to the eastern part of the city – Grabówka, which was inhabited mostly by poorer Jews. This was the first step towards the creation of a ghetto, but it was not completed until early in 1942. 
On the order of Stadtkommissar Dr. Hein, on October 16, 1941, the wearing of beards and side locks by Jews was forbidden for “sanitary reasons.” For violating the order, a fine of 100 złoty and a fourteen-day arrest was imposed. At this time, Jews were also banned from the following streets in Tarnów: Krakowska, Jasna, Marktstrasse, Wallstrasse, Kathedralstrasse including Kazimierza Square to the circle, the Kleinen and Grossen Treppe, Bastei Treppe, Fischgasse, and Festungsgasse. It was forbidden for Jews to come closer than 100 meters to those streets. The presence of Jews in the whole western part of the city now was strictly forbidden. Some Jews who lived there could only enter the eastern part of the city from the southern pathway on Narutowicza, Lipowa, or Mickiewicza streets; the Jews who lived near the circle could access it through Brama Pilzneńska. Going to work located on the forbidden streets was possible only by taking the nearest adjacent cross streets. This order forced most of the Jews to move into the Grabówka district in the east of the city. 
On October 16, 1941, the Germans created a Jewish Police unit consisting of about 300 policemen. The Jewish Police was headed by Miller, then Wasserman, and finally by Diestler. Diestler was a German Jew who had held the rank of captain in the Austrian army. His brutality was much feared among Jews. The Jewish Police was located in the building of a bus depot at Magdeburski Square. 
In the winter of 1941-1942, the Jews had to surrender all fur clothing, winter boots, and skis on pain of death. From December 1, 1941, Jews were prohibited from receiving food packages. A German Police officer, Grunow, came to Tarnów and staged an Aktion against the Jews on December 8, 1941: over 100 Jews were arrested, 17 of whom were shot, and the rest were released after a few days. According to the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) report, in 1939, 285 children were born, while the death rate was 172 people. By comparison, in 1941, 235 children were born, and the death toll was 540 people. 
Most sources date the completion of the ghettoization process in Tarnów in February 1942.   The Germans established an open ghetto in Tarnów that encompassed the following area: left side of Lwowska Street; Pod Dębem Square; and Nowa, Folwarczna, Szpitalna, Polna, and Jasna streets. There were four entrances to the ghetto: two at Magdeburski Square, the third at Pod Dębem Square, and the fourth at Folwarczna Street, near the Judenrat building. 
Until 1942, the Jews had managed to live as normally as they could in such circumstances. They were still able to bury the dead at the Jewish cemetery. At the beginning of 1942, all Jews had to register with the German authorities. In 1942, through March 20, there were 251 reported deaths in the ghetto. Death resulted from hunger, exhaustion, an epidemic of typhus, as well as random shootings. The people felt endangered. The streets were empty by 6:00 P.M. Around 9,500 Jews were receiving social help; the four community kitchens distributed around 7,000 meals per day; there were 78 children in the orphanage; and 51 people resided in the home for the elderly. 
On April 1, 1942, on the eve of Passover, the German officers Grunow and SS-Sturmscharführer Wilhelm Rommelman, upon noticing a Jewish woman selling poultry, demanded to know who had performed the slaughter. The Germans stormed into the house of Lipa, a shochet (ritual slaughterer) and killed him and his family. The Jewish community was deeply affected by the incident and many stopped eating meat. On April 24, 56 Jews were murdered following their return to Tarnów from Lwów. In May, the Germans demanded from the Judenrat 500,000 złoty and furniture sufficient for 500 German apartments. At the end of May, the head of the Jewish Police received an order from the Germans to increase the size of the police force.  
On June 10, 1942, the registration of the Jewish population of Tarnów was completed. Two notices then appeared: the first, signed by SS-Untersturmführer Palten, informed them about the resettlement of the Jews from Tarnów, apart from the hospital staff and the Jews whose identification cards had been stamped; the second notice, signed by SS-Obergruppenführer Julian Scherner, announced that anyone providing aid to the Jews of Tarnów upon their resettlement would be punished by death. The notice also specified that on June 11, 1942, no Jews were to leave their houses, but the houses should remain open. During the first Aktion of June 11-18, which was directed by Kriminalsekretär Wilhelm Rommelmann (who was tried by a Polish court and executed in 1948), German and Ukrainian auxiliary units shot around 6,000 Jews, mainly the sick, the elderly, and children, in the Buczyna Forest at Zbylitowska Góra; they also sent around 3,500 Jews to the Bełżec extermination camp; and shot around 3,000 Jews at the Jewish cemetery in Tarnów. Following this Aktion, the ghetto was considerably reduced in size. 
On June 19, 1942, Stadthauptmann Gustaw Hackbarth announced the creation of an enclosed ghetto for the remaining Jews in Tarnów. According to the decree, 20,000 Jews, as well as Jewish converts, had to move into the ghetto within 48 hours. From the house on 16 Lwowska Street, the borders of the ghetto ran through the following streets: Zamknięta, Szpitalna, Jasna through Polna Street, right side of Goldhammera, Drukarska, Nowa, to Folwarczna Streets. The area was sealed off with barbed wire. There were four guarded gates leading to the ghetto: two of them at Magdeburski Square, the third at Folwarczna Street, and the fourth at the Pod Dębem Square. Polish (Blue) Police guarded the ghetto externally, and Jewish Police guarded it on the inside. The ghetto was administered by SS-Oberscharführer Hermann Blache, who lived at 24 Lwowska Street. The Jews were prohibited from leaving the ghetto on pain of death. There was a Jewish post office inside the ghetto directed by Bronisława Perlberg. The death penalty also applied for making contact with the Polish population. Some Jews, like Mania Korn, Dr. Lustig, and Ms. Organd were killed by the Germans for contacting Poles. Jews had to perform forced labor inside and outside the ghetto. Food was scarce, but some people managed to smuggle it in on their return from external work details. There was an orphanage run by Dr. Lieblich, four community kitchens, a branch of the JSS, and a Jewish hospital section, which treated patients with tuberculosis, was run by Dr. Eugeniusz Schipper. 
After the ghetto was established there were about 40,000 Jews, including Jews from Tarnów and its vicinity, about 3,000 refugees from Kraków (639 of whom were resettled between March 3, 1941 and December 28, 1941), as well as Jews from Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Germany. The Jews organized their own associations of craftsmen that produced items for the Germans. Work details outside the ghetto were escorted by either the German or Polish (Blue) Police. The workers received little payment, and those who did not work received no official help. The German companies using ghetto labor included Papapol, Bon Boveru, Ostbahn, and Madritsch, among others.  
On September 11, 1942, another registration of the Jewish population took place. Some of those who did not get a work stamp sought help with the artisan Raba, who forged stamps for a nominal fee. During the second Aktion on September 12, 1942, which was orchestrated by Rommelmann, the ghetto was surrounded by German and Polish (Blue) Police units. Jews were ordered to assemble at the Magdeburski Square. After the initial selection, another selection was made, in which every tenth Jew was picked out for deportation. Nineteen-year-old Mosze Alban resisted a German by spitting and hitting him, after which the German shot him. On September 13, 1942, around 3,500 Jews were deported to Bełżec. Overall, close to 8,000 Jews from ghettos in Tarnów, Brzesko, Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno were deported to Bełżec. 
The third Aktion took place on November 15, 1942. A few days earlier, a notice appeared announcing that Jews who were hiding in nearby towns and villages could safely enter the Tarnów ghetto. On the day of the Aktion, the Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the ghetto while the Germans rounded up 2,500 Jews, whom they sent to Bełżec. On November 16, 1942, SS-Oberscharführer Blache ordered that the ghetto be divided into ghetto A (for the elderly, children, and people without permanent work) and ghetto B (for all Jews with permanent work papers). The ghettos were divided by a fence. Movement between ghettos was strictly prohibited. There was starvation in ghetto A, but Jews from ghetto B provided clandestine help. By November 1942 all the smaller ghettos in Kreis Tarnow had been liquidated. The Jews who had to clear the area of the former ghettos were transferred to the remaining larger ghettos, including Tarnów, in which around 12,000 Jews were concentrated. Further movement restrictions were imposed on the Jews remaining in the Tarnów ghetto. New armbands were issued, specifying the types of companies where the Jews were working. 
There were some escapes from the ghetto. In the ghetto there was a group of young Jews from Ha-Shomer Ha-Za’ir, of which the most active were Josek Bruder, Szmulik Springer, and Melech Bienenstok. They managed to obtain weapons and make contact with the Polish underground. They also helped those Jews living outside the ghetto. Josef Birken, one of the leaders, and his sister Franka forged Aryan papers. Another form of resisting the enemy was observance of forbidden religious practices. For example, Sam Goetz’s parents prepared a celebration of his Bar Mitzvah on June 21, 1941.  
In mid-August 1943, SS-Hauptsturmführer Amon Goeth arrived in Tarnów to liquidate the ghetto. On September 2, 1943, in the early morning, German and Latvian units surrounded the ghetto and removed the internal fence dividing it in two. The Jews were ordered to assemble on Magdeburski Square. They were notified that they were being sent to the Płaszów camp. Children could not be taken, but mothers secretly smuggled their children with them on the transport. The final roundup and deportation Aktion was conducted on September 2-3, 1943, during which Goeth displayed inhuman cruelty towards the Jews (he was tried in a Polish court, and hanged in 1946). About 8,000 Jews were sent to Auschwitz; 3,000 to Płaszów; and a group of 300 young and strong Jews were selected to clean out the ghetto (Säuberungskolonne).  
The 300 Jews were located in two buildings at 13 and 14 Szpitalna Street, which constituted the last closed area of the Tarnów ghetto. The Ukrainian guards locked the Jews in the houses after they returned from work. The population of the ghetto increased to about 500 when some Jews came out of the bunkers a few days after the Aktion. These “illegal inhabitants” of the ghetto were shot on their way to Szebnie at the end of September 1943. Also, 150 Jews who were no longer needed were taken to Szebnie. The last transport of the remaining 150 Jews from Tarnów was sent to Płaszów on February 9, 1944.
Some Jews were able to hide in the Tarnów area. Around 450 Jews caught in different hiding places were assembled at Widok Street. The Germans shot them and burned their bodies. Others managed to find shelter in nearby villages and towns, or lived on Aryan papers. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the history and destruction of the Jews of Tarnów include the following: Kazimierz Bańburski, Janusz Bogacz, and Janusz Kozioł, eds., Żydzi w Tarnowie. Świat, którego nie ma (Tarnów: Muzeum Okręgowe w Tarowie, 2003); Adam Bartosz, Tarnowskie judaica (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo PTTK “Kraj,” 1992); Adam Bartosz, Żydowskim szlakiem po Tarnowie: In the Footsteps of the Jews of Tarnów (Tarnów: Muzeum Okręgowe w Tarnowie, 2002); Adam Bartosz and Janusz Kozioł, Tarnowski cmentarz żydowski (Tarnów: Muzeum Okręgowe w Tarnowie, 2005); Abraham Chomet, ed., Tarnów: The Life and Decline of A Jewish City (Tel Aviv: Association of Former Residents of Tarnow, 1954-1968); Sam Goetz, I Never Saw My Face (Danbury, CT: Rutledge Books, 2001); Leszek Hońdo, Żydowski cmentarz w Tarnowie (Kraków: Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Jagiellońskiego, 2001); Ian Lichtig, An Incredible True Story of Survival Under the Holocaust (S.I.: I. Lichtig, 1996); William Kornbluth, Sentenced to Remember. My Legacy of Life in Pre-1939 Poland and Sixty-Eight Months of Nazi Occupation (London: Associated University Presses, 1994); Rebeka Lipiner, Kartki ocalałe z płomieni (Tarnów: Muzeum Okregowe w Tarnowie, 1989); Aleksandra Pietrzykowa and Stanisław Potępa, Zagłada Tarnowskich Żydów (Tarnów: Muzeum Okręgowe w Tarnowie, 1990); Stanisław Wróbel, Opowieści o dawnym Tarnowie (Tarnów: Muzeum Okręgowe w Tarnowie, 2003); Proces Ludobójcy Amona Leopolda Goetha przed Naywyższym Trybunałem Narodowym (Kraków: Centralna Żydowska Komisja Historyczna przy Centralnym Komitecie Żydów w Polsce, 1947).
Documents on the fate and extermination of the Jews in Tarnów can be found in these archives: AŻIH (301/436, 570, 571, 580, 836, 1090, 1101, 1111, 1182, 1208, 1591, 1668, 2040, 2053, 2059, 2081, 3228, 3247, 3432, 3433, 3434, 3436, 3437, 3446, 3548, 3579, 3703, 3705, and 3860); USHMM (RG-15.019M, reels 4 and 15; RG-15.020M; RG-15.072M; RG-02.168, 169, and 204; RG-50.002*0049; RG-50.030*0218; RG-50.120*0012 and *0114; Acc.1997.8; Acc.1998.31; Acc.2004.637; Acc.1994.A.427; Acc.1995.A.517; Acc.1995.A.526; and Acc.1997.A.0124,  reels 1, 47, 48); PAP-Tarn (sygn. PTW 346/41, 347/41); SOT (sygn. 150-152, 158); SPT (Zg 1154/46, 1155/46, 1156/46, 1207/46, 1208/46, 1220/46, 1224/46, 1235/46, 1236/46, 1255/46, 1296/46, 199/47, 94/48, 95/48, 96/48, 98/48, 99/48, 132/48, 133/48); IPN (AGK, ASG, sygn. 11, pp. 750, 764 and sygn. 413, pp. 8-9); VHF; and YVA (e.g., O-3/215; and O-41).
Joanna Sliwa
Tuchów
Pre-1939: Tuchów, town, Tarnów powiat, Kraków województwo; 1939-1945: Tuchow, Kreis Tarnow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Tuchów, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Tuchów is located 88 kilometers (55 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. At the outbreak of World War II, around 500 Jews (25 percent of the population) were living in Tuchów. 
The German armed forces occupied Tuchów on September 7, 1939. On September 11, Wehrmacht soldiers shot 12 Jews from Tuchów in the Karwodrza Forest. In November 1939, the Germans burned down the synagogue and destroyed the Jewish cemetery, using Jewish tombstones (matzevot) to pave roads. As soon as the Germans entered the town, they began maltreating the Jews by cutting the beards of Orthodox Jews, looting Jewish businesses, and destroying homes. In December 1939, all Jewish men aged 13 and older were ordered to appear at the local school. The Germans selected 15 men and murdered them in the nearby village of Tarnowiec. The Jewish community paid a bribe to the Germans, so that the corpses could be brought back to town for a religious Jewish burial. A Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by Emil Wachs was appointed by the Germans to keep records of the Jewish population and to enlist Jews for forced labor. 
In 1941, the Germans resettled Jews into Tuchów from neighboring towns and villages, including Ryglice and Gromniki. According to records of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization in Tarnów, on September 30, 1941, there were 536 Jews in Tuchów. The Judenrat and the local branch of the JSS used their scarce resources to assist the refugees as much as possible. In January 1942, the community kitchen distributed 150 meals daily, but it lacked sufficient food to supply all those in need. On March 4, 1942, the JSS opened a public kitchen in Tuchów for about 50 Jewish children. 
Since the Nazis prohibited religious observance, the Jews of Tuchów worshipped secretly, and the home of the Weiss family became a prayer house. In May 1942, the Germans discovered this secret house of worship and murdered six elderly Jews who were praying. 
In 1942, the Germans established a ghetto in Tuchów, which was administered by Karl Oppermann and Hermann Blache, of the Security Police in Tarnów, and by a man named Prussok, who was sent to the Tarnów region from the Schutzpolizei in Breslau (Wrocław). A Jewish Police unit was set up in the ghetto, which was located in the southern part of town, and enclosed with barbed wire. On its establishment, about 2,500 Jews were confined in a ghetto consisting of only 17 houses. (During the entire existence of the ghetto, some 3,000 Jews passed through it.) The Jews worked on local farms, as well as in workshops. The Jews in the Tuchów ghetto did not receive food from the German authorities, but the JSS and the Judenrat distributed food purchased with their scarce resources. There were random shootings of Jews inside, as well as outside the ghetto, and the bodies were buried at the Jewish cemetery. 
In mid-June 1942, the German Schutzpolizei officer Prussok publicly executed six Jews in the town square. On June 23, 1942, Karl Oppermann shot seven Jews, including the chairman of the Judenrat. On orders issued by the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the towns of Kreis Tarnow, except from the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move into ghettos established in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno by July 23, 1942. In September 1942, units of German and Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the Tuchów ghetto. The Jews were commanded to assemble in the town square. After a selection, the Jews were taken to the train station, loaded into cattle trains, and were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Only 43 Jews were spared deportation. They formed the Aufräumkommando, which was ordered by the Germans to clear the ghetto and sort Jewish belongings. The work was finished at the beginning of December 1942. The German Gestapo officer from Tarnów, Oppermann, ordered that the Jews be locked in a building until their resettlement to Tarnów. The next day, Oppermann inspected the building in which the Jews were being held and shot a Jewish man, Grunewald. In December 1942, Oppermann shot 26 Jews at Ogrodowa Street in Tuchów. Once the remnant of Jews from the Tuchów ghetto had been brought to the Tarnów ghetto, Oppermann ordered all of them to be shot. A few managed to escape. The survivors related their stories at the trial of Karl Oppermann in Germany, where he was sentenced to life imprisonment. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Tuchów include: “Tuchów,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984).
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Tuchów can be found in the following archives: USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124, reels 47-48; RG-15.019M, reels 4 and 15; and RG-50.002*0056); IPN (AGK, ASG, sygn. 11, pp. 771-775); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa
Tyczyn
Pre-1939: Tyczyn, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Reichshof (Rzeszów), Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Tyczyn is located 10 kilometers (6 miles) south of Rzeszów. There were 720 Jews living in Tyczyn on the outbreak of World War II in 1939. Soon after the occupation, the Germans ordered the Jewish community to leave within 24 hours and cross over to the Soviet-occupied Polish territories. The initial order was postponed for a few days. At the last minute, the evacuation was “called off for four weeks and then they stopped to talk at all about departures,” as noted by survivor Mina Perlberger in her diary. 
The ethnic German (Volksdeutsche) mayor selected five established leaders of the community to serve in the Judenrat. A wheat merchant, Moszek Goldman, was appointed as its chairman. Jakob Eisen was the Judenrat’s secretary. Its office was located in Tuchman’s house on the market square. The Judenrat’s first order was to register all Jews in Tyczyn and its vicinity aged 12 and older. A second registration in the winter of 1939-1940 served to identify a prisoner’s profession and current work place. Unemployed Jews were assigned to hard labor in the fields, on road construction, and performing swamp drainage. 
According to George Salton (born 1928), in the summer of 1940, Jews were “no longer allowed to travel from Tyczyn to Rzeszów without specific written documents from the police.” Perlberger, a prisoner who worked as a black-market trader, recalled being fined 10 to 25 złoty for this offence. The Jews were also forbidden to leave their houses after 9:00 P.M.; this was particularly problematic, as most of the smuggling to Rzeszów took place at night when the Germans would stop patrolling the roads. 
In May 1941, there were 953 Jews in the town, including 250 refugees, the majority of whom had arrived in Tyczyn on December 15, 1940. Many were former Kalisz and Łódź residents. The Judenrat’s requests for assistance were dismissed by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC), as it described the Judenrat’s welfare efforts as being of “the most primitive kind,” i.e., that the services were limited to the distribution of donated food and clothing, sometimes by way of a lottery. At this time 560 residents were requesting help. 
A number of Jewish men were seized from the streets and taken to labor camps in Babice, 12 kilometers (7.5 miles) from Tyczyn, for the summer of 1940 (or 1941). 
In May and June 1941, a large detachment of German soldiers stationed in Tyczyn demanded the provision of forced laborers. These soldiers were engaged in training and did not bother the Jewish community. Following their departure, with Germany’s invasion of the Soviet Union, some of Tyczyn’s residents, who had fled east at the beginning of the war, returned. Their lodgings were organized by the local administration in homes that German soldiers had recently vacated.
In the spring of 1941, a refugee from Kalisz named ‘Hanka’ and an elderly man, Mates Wachs, were shot. From the fall of that year, the Gestapo and SS began to visit Tyczyn almost every week, conducting house searches, confiscations, and fining the Judenrat for various offences. As regards the visits of the Kreishauptmann, Perlberger wrote: “[he was] searching every home for young females. He was well known for his sadistic, sexually degenerate way of hitting with his riding whip, only females...”  
Perlberger noted in her diary, that as of “February 1942, it was a death sentence for the Jews to cross a border to another city” [sic.]. This was most likely the result of the December 17, 1941 order by the Kreishauptmann to create ghettos in the Kreis. In Rzeszów, the order was effective on January 10, 1942, with the closing of the ghetto, and in the remainder of the Kreis it applied from February 1, 1942.
An open ghetto – unfenced and unguarded – was established in the center of Tyczyn in March 1942. The Jews were still allowed to move around Tyczyn, but as Perlberger noted: “You can’t cross the border from Tyczyn, because you will be killed on the spot.” Jews living in nearby villages (e.g. Hermanowa) were given three days for relocation to the ghetto. In Hermanowa, each family had to wait for the Germans to oversee their departure from their homes and collect the keys. Perlberger’s family was forced to sign a document, surrendering possession of their immoveable property. There was little housing available in Tyczyn, because Jews from other localities who were ordered to transfer to the Rzeszów ghetto had moved to the Tyczyn ghetto instead. The Judenrat was charged with assigning accommodation, which typically amounted to one room per family.
According to Salton, as of the spring of 1942, the Polish (Blue) Police and the SS were permanently present in Tyczyn, patrolling the streets. Violence and killings escalated. One day, 14 men were rounded up and shot at the Jewish cemetery. At this time, the Germans ordered the Judenrat to deliver laborers for transfer to a labor camp in Biesiadka. As the men on the Judenrat’s list went into hiding, the Germans threatened the community with the substitution of their women for labor in Biesiadka. It took the Jewish Police three days to deliver the demanded number of laborers. 
Several contributions, some in the form of overdue taxes, were imposed on the community in the months preceding the ghetto’s liquidation. Five Jewish hostages were shot. Tensions and anger rose within the community, because of the way the Judenrat had handled these demands; e.g., the amount each family had to pay was based on the Judenrat’s estimation of their means. Perlberger records that Polish policemen extorted money and various possessions from the Jews. The community was also reportedly ordered to pay to Poles all the debts owed to them, on pain of death. A local farmer blackmailed Perlberger’s family.  
In late June 1942, the commander of the SS summoned the Judenrat and informed them of the impending resettlement to the Rzeszów ghetto. Judenrat chairman Goldman was arrested. The same day posters were put up: “It was typed and carried the seal and signature of the German Distrikt administrator. It read: ‘Within one week, all Jews residing in Tyczyn and vicinity must be relocated to the Rzeszów ghetto.’” Secondary sources report that relocation took only three days, from June 25-27, 1942. The German and Polish Police escorted columns of wagons to Rzeszów. The Jews were able to take with them very little in the way of belongings. Several people were killed in the course of the ghetto’s liquidation, including Berl Kuflik.  
The Rzeszów ghetto was liquidated in the course of deportations to the Bełżec extermination camp that began in July 1942; its final destruction took place in November 1942. 
Sources:
Useful in the preparation of this entry was the book by George Salton, The 23rd Psalm: A Holocaust Memoir (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002). The following publications contain brief references to the destruction of the Tyczyn Jewish community: Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 533; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), p. 183; Stanisław Poradowski, “Zagład Żydów rzeszowskich,” part 3, in BŻIH, nos. 3-4 (1985), pp. 80, 86, 89-90.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (210/694 (AJDC), 211/1048 (JSS)); USHMM (Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC); Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); RG-15.019M; and RG-02.054); and VHF (# 26577).
Jolanta Kraemer
Ustrzyki Dolne
Pre-1939: Ustrzyki Dolne (Yiddish: Istrik), town, Lwów województwo; 1939-1941: Nizhn’o-Ustriki, raion center, Drogobich oblast’, Ukrainian SSR; 1941-1944: Ustrzyki Dolne, Kreis Sanok, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1999: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Ustrzyki Dolne is located 34 kilometers (21 miles) southeast of Sanok. The 1921 census registered 1,767 Jewish residents in Ustrzyki. German forces occupied Ustrzyki briefly in September 1939 before handing over control to the Soviet Union. Following their attack on the Soviet Union, German forces reoccupied the town in late June 1941.
Most of the information in this entry is based on two detailed testimonies by Herman Iwler, which he gave to the Archives of the Jewish Historical Institute in Warsaw in 1948 and 1949. Iwler never uses the term “ghetto,” although from his descriptions – especially those given in his 1948 testimony – a form of open ghetto most probably existed in Ustrzyki.  Also, Pinkas ha-kehilot: Poland, vol. 2, states that Jews were evicted from their homes and concentrated in a dilapidated area of the town. This publication, however, does not state when the ghetto was established. The ghetto most likely remained unfenced, as neither of these sources mentions any form of enclosure. 
Nonetheless, Jewish movement was restricted from the onset of the German occupation in 1941. For example, at this time the German authorities prohibited Jews from crossing the market square and the main street, the latter starting from the pharmacy building where the Gestapo offices were located. In addition, Ustrzyki Dolne’s Jews could only use side streets, and those only until 7:15 P.M. They were ordered to wear armbands with an emblem of the Star of David. Those caught without an armband were punished with 25 lashes or sometimes shot. 
In the second half of 1941 an outpost of the Gestapo was established in Ustrzyki Dolne; among the more notorious Gestapo-men based there were Johann Bäcker and a man named Doppke. Others who served there included Müller, Schmidtchen, and von Malottki.  The Germans also set up a Ukrainian police force commanded by Ustianowski. The Ukrainian militia conducted searches of Jewish households and confiscated food. Locals were forbidden to sell goods to Jews. Jewish shops were closed.  
The German authorities designated a local veterinarian, Schimel (or Schiml), as the Judenrat chairman. Schimel himself selected the remainder of his staff: Rapaport (dentist), Szymon Reich, Dawid Scheinbach (wholesaler), Sterner Jr. (lawyer), Dawid Harman, and Mojżesz Horowitz; the latter later resigned. 
The first forced labor conscription for local Jews was to build a Russian POW camp in Ustianowa. The Judenrat provided each of the 60 to 80 laborers with a daily ration of 25 grams (0.9 ounces) of bread and a bowl of soup.  
In April 1942, 150 Jews were sent to work in a sawmill and at a refinery. At the same time, the local Gestapo conscripted a separate group of 60 to 120 Jews that were required to reinforce the banks of the Strwiąż River, as well as build a bridge, a shack, garages, stables, and later to regulate the river’s waters. The foreman, Szymon Walzman, often beat his laborers. Early in the summer of 1942, Jewish farmers from the vicinity were also forced to work for the Germans. For example, owners of horses and wagons were made to transport wood from disassembled Soviet shelters and bunkers found in the surrounding forests. 
In June 1942, the Germans ordered all Jewish residents over 65 years old to report to the Judenrat. Prior to this, Bäcker had gone from house to house registering them. Approximately 200 registered men and women were transferred to a local jail that evening (an exact date is not known); 50 of them were shot that same night in the courtyard of the Judenrat’s office while others were taken away in vehicles and shot in a forest near Berechy. According to the historian Andrzej Potocki, the murder took place in Brzegi Dolne. Other publications claim the murder took place earlier, on May 5, 1942, and cite 300 victims. 
Following this mass killing, the Gestapo made several trips to nearby villages including Ropienka, Olszanice, Czarna, Stefkowa, and Wańkowa, shooting many Jewish residents, but sparing horse and buggy owners. In Lutowiska, the Ustrzyki Gestapo ordered all Jews to report to the market square. Eight hundred of them were selected and killed; the remainder was transferred to Ustrzyki Dolne together with the looted possessions of the murdered Jews gathered by Doppke and Bäcker. 
In July or August 1942, the Jews from surrounding villages were also brought into Ustrzyki, to join the ghettoized Jews living there. Iwler describes it as follows: “All of them were driven past the Gestapo, where they were searched [by Gestapo men], who ripped apart their down comforters and killed two children, allegedly for being dirty. At the beginning of spring 1942, the Germans had prohibited Jews from going beyond the limits of the villages.” The Judenrat placed the deportees with other Jewish families. Following the arrival of the rural Jews, according to Iwler, some 3,000 Jews were concentrated in Ustrzyki. At that time – weeks before its liquidation – it was most likely announced that the ghetto was to be closed, with strict orders that nobody could leave it. 
 Individual executions of ghetto residents continued throughout the summer. Reportedly, Doppke conducted them at night in front of the Judenrat building. His victims were most often accused of having cooperated with the Soviets. The Judenrat was instructed to dispose of the bodies, and they were carried away for burial using the doors of the Judenrat office, which had been taken off their hinges. Executions were so frequent, that there was a nightly guard duty especially assigned for this purpose.
Residents of the ghetto were aware of the approaching deportation Aktion and the clearance of neighboring Jewish communities; e.g., conscripted sawmill laborers witnessed passing cattle trains loaded with people. The Judenrat maintained that they contained Soviet POWs. According to Iwler, “the Judenrat instructed us to go to work smiling, with heads up so as to not to incur the anger of the Germans.”
A registration of the ghetto inmates took place in August 1942. Those who received special stamps on their Kennkarte (identity card) were allegedly to be spared from the resettlement. This group of 60 to 70 Jews was purportedly slated for forestry work.  
On September 2, 1942, the Judenrat announced that the workday would end at noon, and that Ustrzyki’s Jews should prepare for their transfer to a labor camp in Zasław, 24 kilometers (15 miles) away. The community was told that they would be housed there in barracks and would work in a paper factory. “Those who refused go were to be shot,” testified Iwler, adding that the Judenrat used this occasion to trick Jews by offering to accept bribes in return for enlisting them for deportation. The order was then rescinded that same day, after which it was announced that 50 individuals were to remain behind, working at the sawmill. Ustrzyki’s Judenrat then sought to extract more funds by offering places on a ‘new list’ of those who were to remain in Ustrzyki Dolne.
The deportees were allowed to take all their possessions by wagon. The column left Ustrzyki under escort at night, on September 2, 1942, and it arrived at the Zasław camp the next morning, on September 3, 1942. Jews from other localities also were being concentrated there. A separate registration was conducted to identify those Jewish men from Ustrzyki fit for labor. Women, children, and the elderly were separated out.
Ustrzyki’s Judenrat president was shot in Zasław. Most of the Jews concentrated there were sent to the Bełżec extermination camp within a week, the first transport leaving on September 6, 1942; the second on September 8. 
Sources:
Reference to the fate of the Ustrzyki Jews can be found in the following publications: Andrzej Potocki, Podkarpackie judaica (Brzozów: Związek Gmin Brzozowskich and Muzeum Regionalne PTTK w Brzozowie, 1993), p. 51; Shmuel Spector and Geoffrey Wigoder, eds., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Life before and during the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem; New York: New York University Press, 2001), p. 1365; Danuta Dabrowska, Abraham Wein, and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 2, Eastern Galicia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1980), pp. 59-62; Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1979-), vol. 39, Nr. 799, pp. 236-259.
The following archival sources were used to prepare this entry: AŻIH (211/1061 (JSS); 301/3558, 301/4314 (Relacje)).
Jolanta Kraemer 
Wieliczka 
Pre-1939: Wieliczka, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis and Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Wieliczka is located about 16 kilometers (10 miles) southeast of Kraków. In 1939, an estimated 1,500 Jews were living there. 
The Wehrmacht occupied Wieliczka on September 7, 1939. By that time, the majority of the town’s male Jewish population had fled. Due to the virtual absence of males, the women, old, and sick also performed forced labor at first. Eventually, the German authorities forced women to become members of the Jewish council (Judenrat). 
Bronisława Friedmann chaired the seven-woman Judenrat. The following women were also members of the Judenrat: Berla (or Berta) Rakower, Berla (or Berta) Zellner, Hania Feidenfron, Helena Brishorn, Salomea Küchler, and Zlata Komhamer. 
The Judenrat’s first order was to collect a contribution of 8,000 złoty demanded by the Germans. The town’s women had to travel to Kraków, where their husbands were hiding, to get the money. They were also required to furnish the offices of the German Gendarmerie (commanded by Wagner) and of the Sonderdienst that were set up in Wieliczka. Three months later, the men started to return gradually, but they were still afraid to cooperate with women in the Judenrat.  
A German named Frenzel was appointed as Stadtkommissar in Wieliczka; he was very susceptible to bribes. In 1940, an SA officer, Hermann Rosig, replaced him.
Although Jewish businesses and houses were registered and repeatedly plundered, the situation in Wieliczka stabilized following Rosig’s appointment. Word spread quickly that the town was a safe haven for Jews, and this attracted refugees. Moreover, its proximity to Kraków played a mayor role in influencing approximately 350 Jewish families to move to Wieliczka. A larger wave of Kraków refugees arrived in Wieliczka in the early summer of 1940. The Judenrat tried to relieve the suffering of the poor by opening a soup kitchen on November 10, 1940.
In December 1940, the German authorities set up a Jewish Police force (Jüdischer Ordnungsdienst) that was commanded by a lawyer, Maksymilian Liebeskind. By the end of 1941, the force had expanded to 20 members. 
The creation of the Kraków ghetto in March 1941 led more Jews to move to Wieliczka in order to escape the harsh conditions of ghetto life. According to Maria Bill-Bajorkowa, the German authorities set a limit of 5,000 Jews for Wieliczka. All those who were not registered were to be shot. Official Judenrat statistics, which registered 4,000 Jews in June 1941, 4,300 by the end of October 1941, and 4,900 in April 1942, may have been falsified, as many testimonies suggest that the number of Jews in Wieliczka actually surpassed the set quota. 
Wieliczka did not have an enclosed ghetto or even a separate Jewish quarter; the Jews continued to live where they wanted in the town, mixed in with the Poles.  However, by late 1941, Wieliczka’s Jews were required to stay within the town’s limits, on pain of death. There was considerable overcrowding in Wieliczka, as the original Jewish population had more than trebled by the spring of 1942. 
A branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help organization (JSS) was established in Wieliczka in July 1941 to take over the organization of welfare from the Judenrat. Chairwoman Friedmann was nominated as the organization’s president, and the lawyer Ludwik Steinberg from Kraków was appointed as her deputy, with Salomon Heller as the third member. Through their efforts, a second soup kitchen was launched at the end of the same month, serving up to 200 meals daily. It was set up for the refugee “intelligentsia” and referred to as the “B” kitchen or “kitchen for the impoverished middle class.” By February 1942, the “A” kitchen- for the poor, served on average 700 meals daily (i.e. 454 grams) of vegetarian soup, of which 30 percent were free of charge. The “B” kitchen prepared up to 300 meals per day (a soup and two vegetable sides) charging 1.50 złoty per meal at a discount.  
By September 1941, male refugees from Kraków took over the Judenrat. Its new deputy, Grossman, later wrote that he and Steinberg (appointed as the chairman) made their participation in the Judenrat conditional on receiving a free hand to select its remaining members. The other members were: the lawyer Zygmunt Landau from Kraków, Leo Münzer from Bielsko as secretary, and four local Jews (Doctor Izydor Rakower, Roman Joachimsman, Chaim Loffelholz (Loffecholz), and Jakub Zellner). According to Zellner, Salomon Gelles, Ozjasz Goldstein, and Bronisława Friedmann were also included in the Judenrat, although Friedmann served only a short time.  
From the very beginning of the war, Friedmann had advocated opening a Jewish hospital in Wieliczka, but the authorities continually denied their permission. A clinic was established on August 21, 1941, with the arrival of a number of doctors from Kraków. Organized and managed by Doctor Otmar Reiner, it was located in the Judenrat building on Seraf Street 11 and admitted patients daily. Patients were treated free of charge in the clinic; however doctors requested to be paid for house visits.
Permission to set up a hospital was finally granted in May 1942, but the authorities stressed that additional approval would be required to open it. The Cheder School building on Bolesława Szpunara Street was subsequently renovated and equipped for this purpose. 
The most significant JSS activity was their provision of a daily breakfast, starting in October 1941, for up to 200 children (3-12 years old). It consisted of 100 grams (3.5 ounces) of bread with marmalade and a glass of chicory coffee with milk or porridge. By the summer of 1942, 78 children in their care were from Wieliczka, while 130 were the children of refugees. 
After partial deportations from the Kraków ghetto in June 1942, Wieliczka’s Jews became concerned about their own fate. Their rabbis, as from the beginning of the war, commanded the community to endure all German brutalities with submissiveness, repeating: “let the beast devour.” The idea of opening workshops and thereby saving themselves by working for the Wehrmacht rose within the Judenrat; some sources cite that it was actually Stadtkomissar Rosig’s idea. At the time Rosig promised that nothing bad would happen to Wieliczka’s Jews and he was “showered with diamonds” again.
“Town Workshops,” an agency linked to those operating already in Bochnia, opened in mid-June 1942 in a local school. Its largest branches consisted of tailors and furriers who repaired winter clothing for the Wehrmacht. 
With increasing reports of Jews being deported from other locations, Wieliczka’s Jews paid bribes of up to 50,000 złoty to obtain unpaid positions in the workshops, yet only about 700 could secure a workplace. All believed that deportations from Wieliczka would be partial and would not affect Jews who worked. A number of those who could not afford bribes reportedly sent denunciations to the Kraków Gestapo. 
It was at this time that the Judenrat intensified their efforts to obtain permission to open the hospital, believing that its patients would be spared from the deportations. A list of 100 patients for admission was prepared, but securing a place on that list cost thousands of złoty. 
In early August 1942, Kraków’s Stadtkomissar Rüger and Rosig demanded a contribution of 1 million złoty from the Wieliczka Judenrat to be paid by August 22. The Judenrat negotiated it down to half a million. The community was already aware that such contributions generally preceded deportations. In those days, many Jews prepared bunkers or secured a hiding place with local Poles. A significant number fled Wieliczka.
On August 20, 1942, Rosig ordered the Judenrat to prepare for the arrival of 3,600 Jews on August 22. These were from Niepołomice, Mogiła, Łapanów, Dobczyce, and Gdów. At the time Rosig told the Judenrat that he intended “to expand the ‘Jewish quarter’ considerably.” The Wieliczka Jewish community was informed about the sudden concentration by posters. Signed by Rosig, they announced that the resettlement would “enlarge the ‘Jüdische Wohnbezirk’ and provide Jews with sustenance.”  Therefore, the concept of a ghetto, or separate Jewish quarter in Wieliczka, was exploited by the Germans to dupe the Jews into thinking they would not be deported, while Wieliczka itself became a temporary concentration point and staging post for the deportations.
The Jews of Niepołomice, Gdów, and Łapanów were informed of their resettlement approximately seven days in advance. They were allowed to take all of their belongings with them and waited for their wagons to be packed. The Gdów Jews were intimidated to such an extent that they prevented anyone from evading the deportation, for fear of possible German reprisals.  An estimated 3,000 to 3,500 Jews arrived in Wieliczka. The authorities announced that from then on all Jews found outside of Wieliczka would be shot, as well as any Poles hiding them. As a result, many Jews were shot at the roadside on the first day following the deadline. 
The Wieliczka Judenrat was unable to house everyone. Approximately 700 of the newcomers were accommodated in a barracks in the Nowy Świat quarter of Wieliczka that was designed to hold no more than 70 people. Poles that lived on the outskirts of the town were forbidden to give shelter to the newcomers, who were ordered to concentrate in the center of Wieliczka. By this time, the town had been surrounded by a number of German units, Polish auxiliary police, and later also by the Jewish Police brought from the Kraków ghetto. Despite this, some people were still able to escape, often with the help of local Poles.  
On August 26, 1942, Kunde, Heinrich, and Becher arrived from Kraków with a list of 128 employees of the “Town Workshops” whose Kennkarte were to be stamped prior to the transfer of them and their families to the Bochnia workshops (a total of 500 people). The authorities at this time demanded another contribution of 150,000 złoty and 3 kilograms (6.6 pounds) of coffee. That same night they informed the Judenrat that all Jews should report to the field near the train station by 5:00 A.M. on August 28, 1942. Rosig maintained that the community would be sent to Ukraine for work. 
On August 27, 1942, the hospital that the Germans had allowed to open just three days prior to the deportation Aktion was liquidated. Its patients and about 40 doctors and nurses were brought to the forest and shot. 
On the day of the deportation a selection took place near the train station. Approximately 700 elderly and infirm people were loaded onto trucks and taken to the Niepołomicka Forest, where they were shot. Others, found in hiding or trying to escape, were killed in the town. About 700 young men were selected for forced labor and sent to Pustków, the Julag in Kraków, and other labor camps. The remainder were loaded onto the waiting train late in the afternoon and sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. It is estimated that at least 6,000 Jews were deported to Bełżec of the around 8,000 Jews concentrated there just before the deportation Aktion. A small clean-up detachment of up to 300 Jews remained in Wieliczka to sort out remaining Jewish property. Following alleged Jewish sabotage in Bochnia – the setting of a fire in the workshops – the 128 laborers that remained in Wieliczka were dispatched to Skawina for liquidation. 
Sources:
Published information on the Jewish community of Wieliczka during the Holocaust includes: Shemu’el Me’iri, ed., Kehilat Vilits’kah: sefer zikaron (Irgun yots’e Ṿilits’ḳah be-Yiśrael, 1980); and Justiz und NS-Verbrechen (Amsterdam: UPA, 2003), vol. 27, Lfd. Nr. 667a.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (210/712 (AJDC); 211/1092-1095 (JSS); 301/573, 301/776, 301/1120, 301/1183, 301/2320, 301/2052, 301/3411, 301/3266, 301/4117, 301/5321, 301/5425, and 301/6245 (Relacje); 302/143 (Pamiętniki)); FVA (# 15); USHMM (RG-02.208M (Pamiętniki), Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC), and Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 50, RG-15.084M (Relacje)); VHF (e.g. # 27085, 30751, 42577, and 45865); and YVA.
Jolanta Kraemer
Wielopole Skrzyńskie
Pre-1939: Wielopole Skrzyńskie, village, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Wielopole Skrzynskie, Kreis Debica, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Wielopole Skrzyńskie, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Wielopole Skrzyńskie is located about 148 kilometers (92.5 miles) east of Kraków. According to the 1921 census, there were 550 Jewish residents, constituting 54.7 percent of the total population of Wielopole Skrzyńskie.
Upon the village’s occupation, the Germans established a Judenrat chaired by Chaim Meller, together with Abraham Langer (treasurer) and Mendel Kanner. In May 1940, the Judenrat reported 763 Jews, including 135 refugees, living in the village. Of that number, 70 had arrived from Inowrocław in December 1939. Other refugees were mostly from Łódź or other localities within Kreis Debica. In late 1940 and 1941, dozens of Jews were sent to a forced labor camp in Pustków near Dębica.  
The Gestapo from Dębica oversaw life in the village, and it often extorted valuables from its Jewish inhabitants. According to A. Rubin, the Germans executed two Jews caught outside the village buying food from farmers in January 1941.
On May 1, 1940, the Judenrat opened a soup kitchen. It served on average 45 breakfasts and dinners per day. On Saturdays those receiving food from the soup kitchen were assigned to local families for a meal. The kitchen closed in November 1940 due to a lack of money. It reopened briefly, only to close again in June 1941. 
In March 1941, 112 Jews from Kraków were deported to Wielopole. By mid-April 1941, their number had risen to 250, as some of the Kraków Jews who were initially assigned to Mielec were later directed to Wielopole.  
In May 1941, the Judenrat wrote to the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) in Kraków, stating that none of the Jewish businesses were under trustee management. In June 1941, a branch of the JSS was set up in Wielopole with three officials, Szaje Tajtelbaum (chairman), Chaim Mejer Lipschitz (deputy), and Jakub Barth. It managed to reopen the kitchen on November 1, 1941, producing 70 meals daily. Those who could afford it paid 10 groszy per meal; most customers received their meals for free. 
Secondary sources date the establishment of the ghetto in the spring of 1942, at which time Jews were forbidden to live in certain parts of Wielopole and were resettled to a few narrow streets. The ghetto was not enclosed, but its inhabitants’ freedom of movement was severely restricted.
In March 1942, approximately 170 Jews were deported to Mielec to work in aircraft factories. Norbert Friedman testified that the Germans surrounded the village one day and announced that if men volunteered for the labor camps, their women and children would not be resettled. Friedman was one such volunteer. 
By May 1942, the JSS had found agricultural employment for 100 Jews. They worked on the surrounding large estates, including in Mała (about 8 kilometers (5 miles) northwest of Wielopole) and other nearby homesteads. 
The ghetto was liquidated on June 26, 1942, when the community was resettled to the ghetto in nearby Ropczyce. In the course of the liquidation – or shortly thereafter – 50 to 56 elderly Jews were shot and buried in a mass grave at the Jewish cemetery. Some of them were brought from the village of Mała. Among the victims were: Arszcz Schaja Hiller, Feiga Mała Hiller, and Samuel Leidner.  
The ghetto in Ropczyce was liquidated on July 23, 1942, when the majority of its population was escorted to the nearby town of Sędziszów and then deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Sources:
The ghetto in Wielopole is briefly mentioned in the following pubications: E. Podhorizer-Sandel, “O Zagładzie Żydów w dystrykcie krakowskim,” BŻIH (1959) no. 30, p. 95; Andrzej Potocki, Żydzi w Podkarpackiem (Rzeszów: Libra, 2004), pp. 189-200; Guy Miron, ed., The Yad Vashem Encyclopedia of the Ghettos During the Holocaust (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2010), p. 928; Arnon Rubin, The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Communities in Poland and their Relics Today: vol. 3, District Krakow (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University Press, 2008), pp. 354-355.
Relevant documentation can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (210/713, 211/344, 211/1096-1097); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS); Acc.1999.A.0154 (AJDC)); and VHF (# 3022).
Jolanta Kraemer
Wolbrom
Pre-1939: Wolbrom, town, Miechów powiat, Kielce województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Wolfram, Kreis Miechow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Wolbrom, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Wolbrom is located 38 kilometers (24 miles) north-northwest of Kraków. In 1921, the Jewish population of the town was 4,276 (59 percent of the total), rising by 1931 to 5,450 Jews. 
When the German invasion began on September 1, 1939, many young men from Wolbrom, Jews and non-Jews, were mobilized into the Polish armed forces. Some were killed in action or captured and taken to Germany, but soon afterward the POWs were sent home. When the German army entered the town, it had been emptied of young Jewish men. Dozens of Jews were immediately shot. The Germans drove the Jews out of town in the direction of Zawiercie, and a number died of exhaustion on this forced march. After two weeks they were allowed to return. 
On a daily basis the Germans abused and humiliated prominent members of the community. They forced the rabbi, doctors, nurses, and pharmacists to sweep the streets. Other Jews were put to work repairing the rail line to Olkusz and Chrzanów. A Jewish council (Judenrat), headed by Moshe Aharon Wolochinsky, was established. A Jewish police force was also recruited. Refugees from Upper Silesia, Kraków, and Łódź, seeking a more secure place, arrived in Wolbrom. Former residents who had left town before 1939 came home. Some who were in the Soviet occupied area of prewar Poland crossed the cease-fire line to rejoin their families. 
The Judenrat was responsible for extracting the money and goods demanded by the German authorities, organizing forced labor, monitoring the 7:00 P.M. until dawn curfew, and enforcing the order for Jews to wear a white armband with a blue Star of David on their sleeves. Jews were required to stay in their own dwellings, refrain from travel to other towns (except with a permit obtainable for a suitable bribe), shave their beards, and not eat white bread. Meat, butter, and eggs, most of which the Germans took from local farmers, were also forbidden to the Jews. Clothing and leather goods were confiscated from Jewish shops, as well as gold and silver, and put into military storehouses. The displacement of people from areas destined for annexation to Germany brought additional refugees to Wolbrom, which was near the new border. When the Jews of Kraków were driven out of the city and their apartments given to SS and Gestapo officers, hundreds more Jews arrived in Wolbrom. The local community struggled to absorb them, mostly in their own homes, with some put up in communal buildings. The Judenrat established a public kitchen, which by October 1940 was feeding up to 200 Jews, so that no one went hungry, despite the deplorable conditions. 
According to the records of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) branch in Wolbrom, in May 1941, just prior to the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the German authorities established an open ghetto, which consisted of 177 houses located in the vicinity of the synagogue.  From the summer of 1941, conditions for the Jews in Wolbrom worsened considerably. By early 1942, a much more brutal Gendarmerie officer, Leutnant Baumgarten, had taken over from Leutnant Müller in command of the 15-man Gendarmerie post on the outskirts of town. Under this new leadership, the Gendarmerie significantly increased the tempo of random killings, abuse, coercion, and demands for money, gold rings, silver synagogue ornaments, and fur coats.  The few goods and valuables that people had in their homes were confiscated. The price of food shot up, resulting in increased shortages and hunger, and the overcrowded conditions exacerbated the deteriorating situation. On April 1, 1942, 4,940 Jews were registered as living in the Wolbrom ghetto, or more than 20 per house. 
In July 1942, the Germans set up a clothing factory in the Bet Midrash HaGadol (community study center) and all tailors were ordered to report with their sewing machines. In August the German authorities demanded 20 kilograms (44.1 pounds) of gold, which the Judenrat managed to collect in the naive hope that this would appease the occupiers. 
The SD office in Kraków organized the first Aktion in Wolbrom in early September 1942. Word spread that on Thursday, September 3, the rabbi and synagogue leaders had hidden the Torah scrolls in a crate and buried it in the old Jewish cemetery – a sure sign that disaster loomed. On Friday the SS notified the Judenrat that everyone was required to report to the market square by 8:00 A.M. on Saturday morning, including the old and the weak. They were to bring up to 10 kilograms (22 pounds) of food and clothing, and leave the doors of their houses unlocked. Anyone attempting to flee or hide would be shot on the spot. The Jews made ready for the fateful day; some hid valuables in their homes. A number of them committed suicide by overdosing on pain-relieving medicine. On Saturday, September 5, the SS and Ukrainian auxiliaries, assisted by the German Gendarmerie and units of the Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the Jewish quarter. As people gathered in the square they saw wagonloads of conscripted Polish youth of the Baudienst carrying shovels and axes. Probably in excess of 6,000 people, including deportees and refugees, were assembled in the square. The initial step was to load about 300 elderly and weak people onto carts (as if to spare them the march to the train station) and take them to the Olkusk Forest opposite the Jewish cemetery, where they were stripped, shot, and thrown into open pits. The rest of those assembled were herded into a marshy area opposite the station. 
Jews from two neighboring towns (which had no train station) were brought to Wolbrom. Around 12:00 A.M., about 1,000 arrived from Żarnowiec. At 4:00 P.M., more than 1,000 from Pilica were brought in, swelling the assembly to more than 7,000. Toward evening the Germans separated out about 2,500 men, aged 18 to 50 and fit for work, and designated them for forced labor. The rest were sent east in cattle wagons to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
The workers, joined by Jews who had been hiding, were held in the community study center. For example, 23-year-old Willie Sterner gave himself up after hiding for three weeks, once he learned the fate of the rest of his family. Over the next few weeks, representatives of German factories came to claim the workers, in groups of several hundred, for forced labor, sending many of them to the Plaszów camp. Their number dwindled to about 150, who were put to work burying the dead and gathering abandoned household goods for shipment to Germany. 
From mid-September 1942 until the liberation of the town at the end of 1944, nearly 400 Jews, who were found or denounced while in hiding, were shot at the Jewish cemetery. At the beginning of November 1942 the final contingent of Jews was sent to Bełżec from Wolbrom. 
Sources:
The yizkor book, edited by M. Geshuri, Wolbrom irenu (Tel Aviv: Association of Former Residents of Wolbrom in Israel, 1962), contains sections in Hebrew and Yiddish, and has a few articles covering the war years and the Holocaust in Wolbrom. The ghetto in Wolbrom is also mentioned in Czesław Pilichowski et al., eds., Obozy hitlerowskie na ziemiach polskich 1939-1945: informator encyklopedyczny (Warsaw: PWN, 1979), p. 569.
Documentation concerning the ghetto in Wolbrom can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (211/1131, 301/1699, 3263); BA-L (B 162/14504); IPN (Bühler Trial); ITS; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), 211/1131); VHF; and YVA.
Samuel Fishman
Żabno
Pre-1939: Żabno, town, Dąbrowa Tarnowska powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Zabno, Kreis Tarnow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Żabno, województwo małopolskie, Poland
Żabno is located 69 kilometers (43 miles) east of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, between 500 and 600 Jews were living there. 
Once the Germans occupied the town, the Jews were subjected to humiliations and restrictions. Jews had to wear armbands bearing the Star of David, and even children caught not wearing their armbands properly were severely beaten and could be shot. Soon after the start of the occupation, Jewish children were denied schooling. There were food shortages in the town, and people encountered difficulties in getting enough to eat. The Jews were prohibited from going more than 2 kilometers (1.25 miles) beyond the limits of the town, which reduced their ability to scavenge for food.  The Jews also were required to perform forced labor, with most being sent to work in agriculture on the estates in the surrounding countryside.  
In May 1940, the Judenrat conducted a census of the Jewish population in Żabno, which served as the basis for reports prepared by the Żabno branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS).  In November 1940, the Żabno Judenrat established a community kitchen that distributed 70 meals per day.  According to the Żabno JSS report for August 1941, there were 634 Jews in the town. Among those Jews: 20 were merchants, 15 skilled workers, 187 laborers (35 of whom were in labor camps), and 183 were unemployed. Jews owned 35 businesses at that time. While 250 Jews were receiving some sort of assistance, another 250 Jews in need were still seeking help. The community kitchen fed 220 people, 11 Jews received monetary assistance, 10 individuals received medical assistance (although there was no hospital in the town), and 50 Jews received additional help.  By September 1941, the number still seeking assistance had increased to 253; the community kitchen gave out 280 meals per day; 25 people received financial assistance; 4 received medical help; and 75 received bread and flour. The report indicates that 37 Jews performed forced labor.  The next Żabno JSS report for October 1941 shows that the number of Jews receiving assistance had increased to 320, while another 345 Jews seeking assistance had to be turned away empty handed. 
On March 10 or 11, 1942, members of the Order Police from Dąbrowa Tarnowska and the Gestapo from Tarnów dragged between 30 and 40 Jews from their houses, and shot them near the brick factory. The bodies were buried in one mass grave at the Jewish cemetery in Żabno. After the event, a few Jews fled from the town and hid with peasants in the countryside, in some cases in return for payment. 
The Żabno ghetto was established at the beginning of May 1942. About 700 Jews were confined within it.  The ghetto was administered by the Order Police from Dąbrowa Tarnowska and the Tarnów Gestapo. There was overcrowding inside the ghetto and the Jews lived in a state of uncertainty and fear. Some people referred to the Jewish area as the “gettele,” hoping that now their persecution would be diminished, as they only lived together with other Jews. They did not want to believe those Jews who claimed that the purpose of ghettoization was to concentrate the Jews in order to facilitate the German anti-Jewish Aktions.  The German persecution of the Jews continued – on May 9, 1942, the Gestapo shot a Jewish man.  According to Polish court documentation, between March 12, 1942 and August 31, 1942, the Germans shot around 50 Jews in Żabno and its vicinity. The bodies were buried in three mass graves at the Jewish cemetery in Żabno. The shootings were carried out by members of the Gestapo from Tarnów and of the Order Police from Dąbrowa Tarnowska in conjunction with the Polish (Blue) Police, and a member of the Sonderdienst named Fanysz. Thus it appears that a dozen or so more Jews were shot in the period up to the liquidation of the ghetto. 
According to an order issued by the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the towns of Kreis Tarnow, except for the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move to concentration points in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno by July 23, 1942.  It is not known how many additional Jews were brought into the Żabno ghetto as a result of this order. Unfortunately very few sources exist that can shed light on living conditions in the Żabno ghetto, as most of those Jews who survived escaped from Żabno before the ghetto was established.
The Żabno ghetto was liquidated in mid-September 1942, around the same time as the second large-scale deportation Aktion in the city of Tarnów. From the summer of 1942, the main officer dealing with Jewish affairs at the Tarnów Gestapo was an official named Rommelmann, who probably was responsible for coordinating the deportations in the Tarnów Kreis on the orders of the SS und Polizeiführer in Kraków. At the time of the deportations, Kreishauptmann Dr. Kipke issued proclamations threatening Poles with the death penalty for concealing Jews and ordering them not to buy or receive Jewish property.  Most of the 650 or so Jews that remained in the Żabno ghetto were sent to the Bełżec extermination camp. About 40 Jews were left behind to clear out the area of the ghetto. At the end of October 1942, the Jews organized an escape into the nearby forests. Their fate remains unknown. 
The German occupation forces were driven out of Żabno by the Red Army in January 1945. Only 15 Jews are known to have survived the war and returned to Żabno, and most of these soon emigrated from Poland.
Sources:
Publications dealing with the history and persecution of the Jews in Żabno include the following: “Żabno,” in Abraham Wein, Bracha Freundlich, Wila Orbach, eds, Pinkas ha-kehilot Polin. Encyclopedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, (Jersusalem: Yad Vashem, 1999), pp. 139-141; and “Żabno” in Adam Bartosz, Tarnowskie judaica (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo PTTK “Kraj,” 1992), pp. 97-98.
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Żabno can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/3446); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 53; RG-15.019M, reels 3 and 15); and VHF (# 39906).
Joanna Sliwa
Zakliczyn
Pre-1939: Zakliczyn, town, Tarnów powiat, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Kreis Tarnow, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo małopolskie, Poland
Zakliczyn is located about 72 kilometers (45 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, there were around 600 Jews (40 percent of the total population) living in Zakliczyn. 
The German army entered Zakliczyn on September 5, 1939. The Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Zakliczyn chaired by Jakub Appel. Other Judenrat members included Mendel Ebenholz, Michał Frant, Izak Kirschenbaum, Roman Finder, and a woman – with the surname Weinstock. 
In 1940, around 220 Jewish refugees from Kraków (50 people), Krynica, and from the countryside arrived in Zakliczyn. The situation of the Jews living in the town was terrible: there was not enough food, medicine, or housing.  In the first months of 1941, around 38 Jews from Zakliczyn were sent to the Pustków labor camp.  Jews also performed forced labor on road construction in the area. In June 1941, the Zakliczyn branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established, with Pinkas Kupfer as chair and Emil Lerner as his deputy.  In October 1941 an epidemic of typhus broke out among the Jewish population of Zakliczyn: about 6 Jews contracted the disease.  In December 1941 a kitchen for around 50 children was opened in Zakliczyn. Apart from receiving meals, the children celebrated Jewish holidays such as Hanukkah.  The JSS was forced to close the community and children’s kitchens in April 1942, due to lack of food. The Jewish inhabitants suffered from hunger and diseases related to malnutrition. 
On July 10, 1942, the Germans established a ghetto in Zakliczyn, which was sealed on July 23, 1942 at 9:00 A.M. The Jewish community had to pay the Germans a “contribution” of 50,000 złoty, and surrender furniture, and other valuable items.  According to an order issued by the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the towns of Kreis Tarnow, except from the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move to concentration points in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno by July 23, 1942.  The Zakliczyn ghetto was an enclosed ghetto surrounded by barbed wire. There was only one gate located on the side that bordered the town square. The ghetto was located between the left side of Mickiewicza Street and Piłsudskiego Street, covering an area of around 500 square meters (599 square yards). The ghetto was under the authority of the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów Dr. Kipke, his deputy Dr. Pyrnus, and SS-Sturmscharführer Wilhelm Rommelman of the Security Police in Tarnów.  In the ghetto there were workshops for tailors and cobblers. A Jewish Police unit was established under the direction of Chaim Ebenholz. Its members included: Hersz Frant, Kantorowicz, Stenek Schreiber, Handel, Spitzer, Mendel Finder, Schneiderman, Leon Dener, Dow Mikołajewicz, Hausman, Józef Schlanger, and Irom. 
More than 2,000 Jews from Zakliczyn and its vicinity were concentrated in the ghetto. Jews from Wojnicz (356), Czchów (290), Ciężkowice (286), Iwkowa (183), Uszwia (147), Pleśna (58), Gromnik (57), Radłów (33), Szczurowa (14), Gumniska (11), and Wietrzychowice (4), in total, 1,439 additional people, were forced into the ghetto. As communication with people outside the ghetto was cut off almost completely, and the Jews had virtually no financial resources left, there was starvation among the ghetto’s inhabitants. Some of the Jewish refugees who arrived in Zakliczyn had already been resettled several times and were unable to bring with them much in the way of personal belongings. They were housed in barns and attics with no sleeping mattresses, since the Jewish quarter consisted of only about 160 rooms and was unable to accommodate all of the new arrivals. Around 20 people had to share one room. Until the end of summer people even slept outside. Before the influx of resettled Jews, about 50 Jews from Zakliczyn were receiving meals at the community kitchen. Thereafter the community kitchen had to feed 825 people.  There was a Jewish medical unit in the ghetto directed by Dr. Helena Schajer-Ehrlichowa and Dr. Józef Bester. 
In mid-September 1942, German police forces liquidated the ghetto in Zakliczyn. The Jews were deported by rail from the Gromnik station to the Bełżec extermination camp. About 72 adult Jews and 1 child, mainly the members of the Jewish Police and the Judenrat and their families, were spared deportation. The Jews, planning on escaping to the forest, began to organize weapons with the aid of some Poles, but they were denounced to the Gestapo. On December 12, 1942, SS-Unterscharführer Rommelmann shot about 50 Jews in Zakliczyn, who were buried in a mass grave near the synagogue. The Germans ordered the synagogue to be dismantled afterwards. Around 20 Jews still remained to clean up the area of the ghetto. Five Jews had to bury the dead and 4 Jewish girls were taken to the Tarnów ghetto. The remaining 16 Jews were taken to Brzesko cemetery to be shot. Only one Jew was able to escape from this last remnant. 
Among the few survivors from the Zakliczyn ghetto were Regina (Rivka) Riegelhaupt and her two daughters Lea and Judit, who were smuggled out of the ghetto dressed as Polish peasants by a Polish acquaintance, Andrzej Piechniczek, shortly before the ghetto’s liquidation. They survived by hiding with a number of poor peasants until the liberation, but nearly starved. Others were not so lucky. German Police from Zakliczyn shot Maria Pierzynski on January 20, 1944 for sheltering two Jews, Benjamin and Roman Sukman. 
Sources:
Publications dealing with the history of the Jews of Zakliczyn and their fate during the Holocaust include the following: “Zakliczyn,” in Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss, eds., Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 146-147; “Zakliczyn” in Adam Bartosz, Tarnowskie judaica (Warsaw: Wydawnictwo PTTK “Kraj,” 1992), pp. 96-97.
Documents on the fate of the Jews in Zakliczyn can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1758, 2038, 2051, and 3733); IPN; USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 52; RG-15.019M, reel 14); VHF (# 19005, 27431, and 31437); and YVA. 
Joanna Sliwa
Żmigród Nowy
Pre-1939: Żmigród Nowy, town, Kraków województwo, Poland; 1939-1945: Zmigrod Nowy, Kreis Jaslo, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: Nowy Żmigród, województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Żmigród Nowy is located about 140 kilometers (87.5 miles) southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II, 800 Jews were living in Żmigród Nowy.
The German army occupied Żmigród Nowy on September 8, 1939. They immediately started to impose restrictions on the Jews. Jews were prohibited from moving freely, were forced to wear armbands with the Star of David, had to pay “contributions” to the Germans, and were required to perform forced labor. On September 14, 1939 (the first day of Rosh Ha-Shanah), German soldiers entered the synagogue and beat those worshipping there. On October 5, 1939 (the last night of the Jewish holiday of Sukkot), the Germans set fire to the synagogue and ordered the Jews to raze the building to the ground.
In November 1939, the Germans established a civil administration in the newly formed Generalgouvernement. Żmigród Nowy was incorporated into Kreis Jaslo, within Distrikt Krakau. Regierungsrat Dr. Walter Gentz was the Kreishauptmann from February 10, 1941.  The Border Police office (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, or GPK) was commanded from 1940 to 1943 by SS-Hauptsturmführer Dr. Wilhelm Raschwitz. Stationed in Żmigród was a unit of German Gendarmerie under Paul Roliff, which controlled the Polish (Blue) Police.
At the end of 1939, the Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Żmigród Nowy headed by Hersz Eisenberg, which was subordinated to the Judenrat in Kreis Jaslo on April 29, 1940. The Germans ordered the Judenrat to conduct a census of the Jewish population. The Judenrat was entrusted with distributing food, and providing medical and housing assistance. It also prepared lists of Jews for work details to repair roads and bridges, and to dig trenches. The forced laborers received meager food rations and suffered from disease. Every day about 50 Jews were sent out for road construction work for the German company of Emil Ludwig at Lipowce near Dukla. From the spring of 1941, several transports of Jews were sent to various forced labor camps from Żmigród. 
In 1940, Jews were brought into Żmigród Nowy from the surrounding villages. A public kitchen was established that initially distributed almost 200 meals per day. In February 1941, the aid committee of the Judenrat reported that 114 daily meals were supplied, 115 people received housing help, and 25 Jews received financial assistance. That same month a Society for Health Protection was created, headed by Hersz Eisenberg. In March and April 1941, 100 Jews from Kraków, 150 from Łódź, and 200 from Jasło were brought to Żmigród, raising the Jewish population to 1,500 and producing overcrowding. In addition, the Jews were ordered to surrender all valuable items to the Germans, and in December 1941 all fur clothing.
The increased Jewish population led to food shortages. On July 25, 1941, the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) branch in Żmigród sent a telegram to the main office in Kraków warning that 300 people were starving because the community kitchen had no food. On January 13, 1942, about 300 additional Jewish refugees from Jasło arrived in Żmigród. Attempts by the Judenrat to prevent this transfer were in vain. Living conditions in Żmigród deteriorated further; the JSS complained of a lack of medicine and reduced food rations due to the influx of refugees.
A “Jewish residential area” (open ghetto) was established in Żmigród Nowy in the first half of 1942. It was inhabited by the Jewish population of Żmigród and its vicinity, as well as by refugees. On its establishment, it contained about 1,300 Jews. The Żmigród Jewish residential area was not fenced in, but signs were put up around the open ghetto warning Jews that they were forbidden to leave the borders of the town on pain of death. The first Jewish victim of the Germans was “mute Dovid” who left the town to get flour from a peasant and was shot by the German police officer Kreil in 1942. There was immense overcrowding in the ghetto and living conditions became unbearable. At the beginning of 1942, the authorities demanded 100,000 złoty from the Judenrat, threatening to kill chairman Eisenberg. In February 1942, the Judenrat made plans for Jews to be employed as craftsmen, as a way for the Jews to become useful to the Germans and perhaps avoid deportation. Work outside the town also enabled some Jews to barter items illegally and smuggle food back into the ghetto. 
In May 1942, the JSS created a sanitary unit, which collected bedding and clothing for the poorest Jews, cleaned the living quarters, and distributed soap. The JSS also established a day care for 90 children, who were also fed in the public kitchen and received medical care. On June 17, 1941, the JSS created a mother and child committee headed by Rab Hersch that provided food to 72 Jewish children and 15 infants. 
On July 7, 1942, all the Jews in the Żmigród ghetto were ordered to assemble on the soccer field. At that time there were around 2,000 Jews in the ghetto. German, Polish, and Ukrainian police units surrounded them. The able-bodied were ordered to register for work with representatives of various German companies. All Jews were required to hand in their valuables. Members of the Gestapo brutally murdered the chairman of the Judenrat in front of the other Jews. A group of 1,250 Jews, comprised mostly of women, children, the sick, and the elderly, was taken by truck to a forest near Hałbów, where the Germans shot them and buried them in a mass grave. On July 12, 1942, around 150 Jews were sent to the Płaszów concentration camp. On August 15, 1942, a group of Jews was sent to the Zasław labor camp near Kraków. The remaining Jews of Żmigród were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp at the end of the summer in 1942. 
About 70 or 80 Jews managed to escape the July 1942 deportation Aktion and hid in the forests, but most were hunted down by German and Polish police. For example, on April 25, 1943, the Gestapo shot 16 people, including 2 Jewish children. They took the Jews from a local prison and shot them in a mass grave near the Jewish cemetery in Żmigród. In the second half of 1943, 3 Jews from Żmigród were caught by the Germans and brought to the Jasło prison where they committed suicide. 
After the war the Jewish community of Żmigród was not revived. The survivors emigrated to Israel and the United States. After World War II, Żmigród regained its status as a town and was renamed – Nowy Żmigród.
Sources:
Publications dealing with the persecution and murder of the Jews in Żmigród Nowy include the following: “Nowy Zmigrod,” in Pinkas ha-kehilot. Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities: Poland, vol. 3, Galicia and Western Silesia, eds. Abraham Wein and Aharon Weiss (Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1984), pp. 152-154; and the memoir by Leo Rosner, The Holocaust Remembered – A Child Survivor’s Account of Imprisonment and Redemption 1939-1945 (2003).
Documents on the extermination of the Jews in Żmigród Nowy can be found in the following archives: AŻIH (301/1764); BA-L (B-162/14484); IPN (Dsn 13/5/67/“W” 1093; Dsn 13/5/67/“W”/393; OK Rzeszów S 13/67/R; Sąd Grodzki w Jaśle Zg 8/47; AGK Tarnów-Rzeszów sygn. 5, k. 167); USHMM (Acc.1997.A.0124 (JSS), reel 54; RG-15.019M, reels 10 and 17; RG-50.002*0033; RG-50.002*0039; RG-50.431*0788); and YVA.
Joanna Sliwa

