Błażowa is located 25 kilometers (16 miles) south of Rzeszów. The 1921 census reported 930 Jews living in Błażowa (18.2 percent of the total population of 5,123); another 51 Jews resided within the Błażowa gmina. The Błażowa Jewish community numbered 825 people in 1939.
After the Soviets invaded Poland from the east on September 17, 1939, German troops stationed in Błażowa tried to expel as many Jews as possible by ordering them to cross the San River – located less than 16 kilometers (10 miles) from Błażowa – which had already been reached by Soviet forces. A total of 57 Jews left Błażowa permanently, and 768 decided to stay.  
German authorities set up a Jewish council (Judenrat), with Abraham Unger as the chairman and Wolf Silberstain as the secretary.  Mojsze Weiss was charged with assigning local Jews to labor conscription in accordance with German demands. Jakob Atlas was also a member of the Judenrat.
Members of Błażowa’s Jewish establishment were generally assigned to paid jobs that were fairly easy, such as working at a large estate occupied by the German authorities. Both Poles and Jews worked the estate’s land; as laborers, they were not mistreated. Weiss negotiated laborers’ paid minimum wages with the estate’s owner; most likely they received 1 or 1.20 złoty per day. Those Jews who were assigned to work for the municipality were unpaid. 
According to the survivor Jozef Atlas, the Germans did not interfere with local Jews and hardly ever came to Błażowa. It seems that there was only a Polish collaborationist (Blue) Police unit in the town, at least from the summer of 1941, when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union. As Jozef Atlas reported, the Polish Police were ill-disposed towards the Jews at times, and confiscated goods in their frequent house searches.
By July 1940, 89 deportees from Łódź and 50 from Kalisz had been transferred to Błażowa via Rzeszów. By mid-October 1940, 60 more had arrived from the same towns.  In December 1940, the Judenrat reported the following statistics regarding Jewish residents in Błażowa: out of a total of 991 Jews, 778 (240 families) were locals. Out of the total of 213 newcomers, 154 were deportees (39 families) and 59 refugees (23 families). The latter came to Błażowa as they had relatives there and had to rely on their support.
Thirty of the deportee families (90 people) subsisted solely on the welfare provided by the Self-Help Committee set up by the Judenrat, as less then 10 of the newly arrived families were able to find employment. A parentless child that was found later in Błażowa was assigned to a private family for sustenance at the Judenrat’s expense.
The Judenrat opened a soup kitchen on November 26, 1940, which placed a great financial burden on the community. It served an average of 120 meals daily, although there were demands for 200. Those able to pay were charged 0.20 złoty per meal. Aside from the Judenrat’s small monthly donation, this charge was the only other source of income for the kitchen. 
A local branch of Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), subordinated to the Kreis office in Rzeszów, was established on May 2, 1941, and took over provision of welfare for Błażowa’s Jews. Józef Natansohn chaired the local committee, which also included Hersch Lieber and Simche Intrator. However, the efforts of the local JSS were largely futile, as the kitchen ceased its activity by August 1941 due to lack of funds.
When Natansohn resigned in September 1941, Doctor Jakób Neiss was charged with running the organization. Unhappy with the performance of the other two elderly members of the JSS (Lieber and Intrator), Neiss suggested that they be relieved from the committee by November 1941, because in his opinion they were either not willing or not capable of fulfilling their duties. At Neiss’s suggestion, David Lieber and Aleksander Klaristenfeld were nominated in their place. When the kitchen reopened in January 1942, it served only children, the elderly, and the sick. An estimated 80 children were undernourished in Błażowa, but the kitchen was able to feed only a total of 70 people per day.
JSS records imply that most Jewish businesses were taken over and placed under trustee management by mid-1941, although in many cases this process had been accomplished much earlier. In July 1941, only 13 Jewish craftsmen were running their own businesses: haberdashers, cobblers, and tailors. 
In mid-June 1941, approximately 100 Jews were taken to Rzeszów and employed in road works. They received full board and were paid enough to save some money for their families in Błażowa. This, the JSS believed, eased the burden on the town considerably. Another 80 Jews labored at this time outside of the gmina. By September 1941, the number of Błażowa workers decreased to 40 laboring within the gmina, and 35 beyond it. The same source reports approximately 250 Jews working in the gmina in the following months and none beyond its borders. There is no information on where or what kind of labor Błażowa Jews performed then, or if they were paid or compensated in any way. 
According to a survivor, Sam Reich, in the winter of 1941, the German authorities requested one young man from each Jewish family in Błażowa to go to a labor camp. The roundup was conducted in the middle of the night by two SS men, who arrived in a truck. Approximately 40 to 50 boys were driven to the nearby Huta Komorowska labor camp. The camp was unfenced, and although it was guarded by civilian ethnic Germans (Volksdeutschen) it was controlled by the SS. Its commander, a brutal man named Johann Robert Schmidt, was later replaced by Kopf, and then Nickel. There were no toilets in the camp. Water had to be delivered by wagons from another town. When it was available, it was dirty and there was never enough for the prisoners to wash themselves. Many died of disease and exhaustion there. Inmates were housed in a wooden barracks and slept on bunk beds with little straw. Each day they were escorted to a nearby forest to cut beech trees.
During the “fur Aktion” in December 1941, Błażowa Jews were given only two days to give up their fur garments and other winter clothing.
By mid-January 1942, the community was made aware that from February 1, 1942, Jews would no longer be allowed to leave Błażowa’s town limits. The basis for this was an order issued by the Reichshof Kreishauptmann, Heinz Ehaus, on December 17, 1941, creating Jewish quarters on the territory of the Kreis. It was effective from January 10, 1942 in Reichshof and, in the remainder of the Kreis from February 1, 1942. A ghetto in Błażowa was most likely set up soon after this date. There is no information available as to how the establishment of the ghetto influenced the community’s life. 
A new demand for young Jewish laborers came in the spring of 1942. According to Jozef Atlas, the Jews captured in this roundup were sent to the Pustków labor camp. Those who had fake jobs through connections (e.g. Atlas, whom the Judenrat had registered as a courier) were able to stay in Błażowa.
That spring, the Gestapo suddenly appeared in Błażowa. Jews ran in panic trying to hide in the nearby hills and along the riverbed. A total of 10 or 11 (according to another testimony, up to 15) Jews were captured and executed that day. Among them were Błażowa’s rabbi, Meir Shapiro, and his son. 
In May or June 1942, the Jews living in the vicinity were resettled into the Błażowa ghetto. The Błażowa community was not surprised by the resettlement to the Rzeszów ghetto. German authorities permitted a special market to be open for a week or two for Jews to sell their belongings. Then local Poles were ordered to report with their wagons on the day of the deportation to transport the ghetto residents to the Rzeszów ghetto. 
The liquidation of the Błażowa ghetto took place on June 26, 1942. There is no information on how many Jews were evacuated to Rzeszów. A Polish woman, Stanisława Jakubczyk, is known to have been shot in the course of the Aktion, but there is no information regarding Jewish victims on that day. 
In July 1942, the Jews of Błażowa along with the other Jews concentrated in the Rzeszów ghetto were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
