The town of Brzozów is located 18 kilometers (11 miles) north of Sanok. There were 1,127 Jews living in Brzozów in 1921, constituting 21.7 percent of the total population. Their number had fallen to 1,046 by 1931.
The Germans occupied Brzozów on September 9, 1939. Upon entering the town, they confiscated merchandise from Jewish shops, marked them with an inscription in yellow paint (“Jew”), and later assigned trustees to these businesses. Jewish residents, including their rabbi, Mojżesz Weber, were forced to clean streets and labor at nearby petroleum wells. Women cleaned the offices of the German administration. By October 1939, the number of Jews had declined to 920, as many fled east to the Soviet-occupied Polish territories.
On October 26, 1939, the Germans appointed a Jewish council (Judenrat) chaired by Benzion Laufer. Joel Fass replaced him, most likely at the beginning of 1940. Mojżesz Knobelbarth was Fass’s “sword-arm”; Sala Biber (secretary) and Uszer Freund (treasurer) also staffed the Judenrat. The Gestapo, together with officials from the Kreis and Landrat offices, paid the Judenrat frequent visits, demanding contributions in foreign currencies, gold, tea, coffee, liqueurs, and furs. 
A German Gendarmerie post and its jail were located initially at 1 Sienkiewicza Street; later it was moved to the grounds of a Church parish. The prison of a local court was located on Mickiewicza Street.
By March 1940, 91 Jewish refugees had settled in Brzozów. The Judenrat opened a kosher soup kitchen for their benefit on March 7, 1940. It operated six days a week, but half of its meals were meatless. The kitchen served on average 140 meals a day, but only 33 to the newly arrived refugees. The Brzozów community contributed in 25 percent of the kitchen expenses, while the remainder was covered by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC). Due to financial constraints, meals with meat were soon reduced to one per week. As a result, the recipients became “very discontented” and the Judenrat considered closing the kitchen. Unable to finance it any longer, the Judenrat had no other choice and closed it anyway on July 20, 1940. 
In August 1940, the Judenrat reported 910 Jews (including 113 refugees) living in Brzozów. By November 7, 1940, the number of Jews had risen to 944, and the Judenrat was reporting that, “We are sending over 300 workers to labor camps in Krosno, Baligród, Wzdów, and Bzianka.” 
In May 1941, a local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in Brzozów to relieve the Judenrat of its assistance duties to the poor and refugees. Out of a total of 1,007 Jews in Brzozów, one quarter sought assistance and 811 were registered as “without an occupation.” There were, however, 44 stores and 21 Jewish workshops still operating in the town. At the same time, only 13 Brzozów Jews were laboring in camps outside of the gmina. 
The Brzozów ghetto was most likely set up in the second half of 1941, or possibly at the beginning of 1942. The ghetto encompassed the eastern part of the market square, including Piastowa and Kazimierzowska streets. The displacement was without warning. Brzozów’s Jews were allowed to take up to 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of clothes and household goods with them. 
Jacek Joterski, a Pole who assisted the Jewish community during the war and on whose memoir this entry is largely based, states that the ghetto inmates were forbidden to travel more than one kilometer (0.6 mile) beyond the town limits on pain of death. The ghetto was severely overcrowded with up to 10 people sharing a room, typically with only straw for a bed and people sleeping in shifts due to the lack of space.  
None of the sources refer to the ghetto being physically enclosed. A Jewish police force was organized in October 1941 to keep order inside the ghetto and to guard it internally. Approximately 200 men were conscripted into the Ortschutz (local protection force) and also air-raid-defense units, which guarded and patrolled the ghetto at night and enforced the blackout. The latter included Poles and was supervised by the Gendarmerie and Polish Police. Fifteen prominent Poles and all ghetto residents were declared to be hostages to prevent any acts of sabotage.
In October 1941, the JSS reported that it was responsible for a total of 1,350 Jews in seven neighboring settlements; of that number 1,000 were Brzozów Jews. It was at this time that the soup kitchen was reopened. Over a dozen workers labored on road works in Kalnica near Baligród. 
In May 1942, the authorities announced an increase in the size of the Jewish Police. 
On June 18, 1942, 400 Jews from the surrounding settlements were transferred to Brzozów. The Housing Committee and the Jewish Police placed them en masse in community buildings. It was also reported that a group of Jews was transferred from the Krosno ghetto. At that time, the Jewish Police was in the process of recruiting new members, as most of its staffers had been sent to Jaśliska to supervise Jewish laborers.  Among the newcomers were approximately 20 families from Huminiska, who even before their transfer to the ghetto had been working in Brzozów on a daily basis, carrying stones for road construction. Ten of these families were housed in a local school. 
At the beginning of August 1942, 258 Jews were deported to the Płaszów labor camp via the Targowiska train station. Over 40 people were sent for spadework at the petroleum well in Grabownica.
The Germans informed the Judenrat one day in advance that the ghetto residents would be resettled to labor camps on August 10, 1942. It was also announced that 50 craftsmen and their families would stay in Brzozów. All the Jews were ordered to gather at the local stadium near the Stobnica River with up to 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage. The community was anxious and suspicious of German intentions, as they were aware that large ditches had recently been dug in a nearby forest on August 8.
The ghetto residents were transferred to the stadium unescorted. There, a selection by a single SS-man was conducted; he directed individual Jews to be escorted away by other SS-men onto three trucks standing at the stadium’s gate. The Judenrat secretary, Sala Biber, checked those selected against a list. The trucks departed in a southwesterly direction towards the Spring Forest (Las Zdrojowy). Some of the trucks reportedly went northwest, in the direction of Stara Wieś village. By 10:30 A.M., the stadium was empty. The last to be loaded onto trucks were the members of the Judenrat.
The trucks were unloaded near the turning off point to Zmiennica, at the Spring Forest. Jews were ordered to undress and then led deeper into the forest to an opening, which locals often used for picnics. Three SS-men carried out the executions by shooting their victims in the back of the skull on the edge of the pits. Small children were killed using an iron crowbar. By 2:00 P.M., an estimated 700 to 800 Jews had been murdered. As the SS had ordered the Judenrat to prepare a detailed list of all those selected to be killed, a search for the approximately 100 who had gone into hiding ensued.  
According to another source, the Krosno Gestapo conducted the liquidation Aktion. In its course, 1,400 Jews were murdered, of which 800 were shot in the settlement of Karolówka.  Some sources, e.g., Obozy hitlerowskie and Pinkas ha-kehilot, state that a number of Jews survived the selection and were sent to Iwonicz (23 kilometers (14.5 miles),  southwest of Brzozów). 
