Kolbuszowa is located about 150 kilometers (94 miles) east of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, around 2,500 Jews were residing in the town.
Following the German invasion on September 1, 1939, many Jewish refugees arrived in Kolbuszowa. Upon capture of the town, about two weeks later, German soldiers began kidnapping Jews for forced labor, and searching Jewish homes for valuables. At this time, many Jewish homes were burned down and looted.
In the fall of 1939, Gestapo men arrived in Kolbuszowa and took several Jews hostage, threatening to kill them if the Jews did not leave town within a few days. A number of Jews fled to the Soviet-occupied zone, but several days later the evacuation order was rescinded and some Jews who had left returned. In mid-November, German soldiers requisitioned most of the Jews’ remaining food and merchandise.  
In December 1939, Jews over the age of 12 were required to wear white badges bearing a blue Star of David. Initially the penalty for noncompliance was a 100 złoty fine, but subsequently the death penalty was introduced for this offense.
On January 25, 1940, the Germans established a Sonderdienst police unit in Kolbuszowa, composed mainly of young ethnic Germen men. The German Police soon found it difficult to find the 150 to 200 Jewish forced laborers demanded daily. So a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in March 1940, headed by Dr. Leon Anderman. The Jews were registered and performed forced labor in rotation. The payment for a replacement was initially a loaf of black bread, and later only half or a quarter of a loaf. The Judenrat also paid bribes to the Germans to halt the ransacking of Jewish homes, to release detained Jews, and to obtain permits for Jewish train travel. It raised funds for this by taxing the Jews. 
In July 1940, all Jews aged 12 through 60 were registered and issued work cards. On September 9, German officials selected 50 Jewish men to be sent to the forced labor camp in Rzeszów. Two months later, the Judenrat arranged for their release. In November another roundup occurred; this time 80 Jews were chosen for forced labor in Pustków.
In June 1941, Landkommissar Twardon arrived in Kolbuszowa. On June 12, he ordered the resettlement to Rzeszów of Jews living in the market square. This measure decreased the Jewish population prior to the establishment of a ghetto. On June 13, Twardon gave the Jews only 48 hours to move into the ghetto, which was located in the poorest section of town, where 700 Jews and 90 Poles resided. Now the Poles were relocated to make space for 1,100 additional Jews in this area. The ghetto was bordered on the east by the river, on the west by Sędziszew Street, and on the north by the “Golden Row.” It did not include the market square, where Jewish shops were transferred to Poles. 
For the relocation, the Jews lacked transport and feared not making the deadline. On the second day, the German police increased the panic by beating up any Jews they encountered. That night they surrounded the ghetto and arrested 26 Jews, including most of the Judenrat. Efforts were made to obtain the release of Dr. Anderman, with the involvement of some Polish notables, but Twardon refused, and a new Judenrat was formed with Paszek Rappaport at its head. 
Soon afterwards, the new Judenrat raised the money demanded to purchase the return of those Jews who had been relocated to Rzeszów. The arrested Jews were sent to Auschwitz. Within a short time, most were killed and the Gestapo insisted the families sign statements confirming the alleged cause of death. 
In the ghetto clothing and shoes were made from old rags and scraps of wood. Hunger was severe. The Judenrat established a public kitchen, where many Jews received their only meal of the day. Smuggling into the ghetto was accomplished through permits to travel outside, arranged by Rappaport for a high price. The Judenrat and a few of Rappaport’s friends obtained permits, enabling them to smuggle in food, kerosene, soap, wood, and other needed items, at the risk of their lives. 
On January 5, 1942, posters were put up around the ghetto, signed by Kreishauptmann Dr. Heinz Ehaus, prohibiting Germans and other “Aryans” from entering the ghetto without a special pass.  This measure probably resulted from a fear of the spread of typhus. In January 1942, the Germans demanded that the Jews surrender all fur items on pain of death.
In February 1942, the Jewish Police was established, to assist the Judenrat with its functions. Landkommissar Twardon enacted many new decrees, such as, forcing Jews to shave their beards, and demanding a ransom of 5 kilos (11 pounds) of gold for the lives of 15 Jews. On April 28, 1942, the Gestapo arrested and shot more than 20 Jews according to a list prepared by a Ukrainian informant, who served in the police. When Twardon learned that three Jews had only been wounded, he sent his doctor, who uncovered the wounds and left the men to die. 
The murdered Jews were buried in mass graves in the Jewish cemetery. However, their family members dug up the corpses and put a knife in each right hand to symbolize revenge, before reburying them in family plots. 
Three days later the Gestapo demanded various luxury items, including silk stockings, wool for suits, and canaries in cages. If the items were not produced by evening, another execution was threatened. As they could not be found in the ghetto, several Jews snuck out and bought the items at high prices from Poles. When the Gestapo men were satisfied the demands had been met, they left. 
Conditions steadily deteriorated as starvation increased. New decrees were issued and shootings became commonplace. Jews believed that in order to remain in the ghetto, they must be productive. Therefore, a cooperative workshop was established in the ghetto synagogue. After an inspection of the workshop, the Germans announced that the workers and their families could remain in Kolbuszowa.
In June 1942, Kreishauptmann Ehaus made repeated financial demands of the Jewish communities in the Kreis, which had to be paid within one week. If payment was incomplete, members of the respective Judenrat were murdered, corresponding to the deficient sum. Each time, the various Judenrat members were summoned to Rzeszów to hand over the money. According to Salsitz’s account, Kolbuszowa was the only Judenrat that managed to pay each sum in full and therefore suffered no losses to its Judenrat. 
After the executions, Ehaus announced that all Jews in the Kreis would be evacuated to Rzeszów by June 25-27. Panic and fear spread through the ghetto, as the residents quickly prepared for their departure. In preparation, the Judenrat used its remaining flour to bake one loaf of bread for every person.
On June 25, 1942, approximately 100 SS men encircled the ghetto and then drove the Jews out of their houses to the gates. All the Jews’ possessions were loaded onto peasants’ wagons, leaving no space for the Jews, so that everyone had to go on foot, escorted by the German and Polish police. On arrival in Rzeszów, the peasants demanded payment for the transportation, threatening otherwise to steal the Jews’ possessions. 
The second evacuation the next day was much smaller, but conducted in the same manner. Afterwards, thousands of peasants poured in to take property from the abandoned Jewish homes. A token sum was paid, to make it appear that this was not looting. Only three Jews remained in the ghetto to run the cobbler’s cooperative, making suits and boots for the German Police. 
On June 28, 1942, Twardon went to Rzeszów and ordered a group of Jewish men to return to Kolbuszowa to dismantle the ghetto houses. The men were housed in the Bet Midrash, now called the “Kolbuszowa Labor Camp.” Some Kolbuszowa Jews were sent from Rzeszów to the Jasionka labor camp, where most were murdered or died of starvation. The other Kolbuszowa Jews in Rzeszów were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
A few Jews survived in hiding, in the camps, or as partisans in the forests. Some survivors were murdered by Poles, when they returned home, and many emigrated soon afterward.  The Jewish community of Kolbuszowa was not reestablished after the war.