Sokołów Małopolski is located 27 kilometers (17 miles) northwest of Rzeszów. On the eve of World War II, there were 1,600 Jews living there. 
Following the German occupation of the town in September 1939, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was appointed in the fall. Leon Kaufmann became its chairman. One of the Judenrat’s main functions was providing laborers for the Germans. 
By December 1939, over 200 Jews who had been deported by the German authorities from Łódź were transferred to Sokołów Małopolski via Rzeszów. Upon their arrival, Sokołów’s Jews spontaneously set up a Committee for the Support of Deportees. A soup kitchen opened, distributing breakfasts and dinners. The Judenrat had taken charge of the Committee by January 1940. 
In March 1940, there were 1,700 Jews living in Sokołów, including 270 deportees from other areas. The number of deportees fluctuated, with several groups of Jews arriving and then leaving Sokołów; by June 1940, the number had fallen to approximately 150. 
Those Jews who remained in Sokołów worked for a construction company on various projects on and around the market square. Civilian supervisors named Jeschko, Lindner, and Schäfer often beat these laborers. In winter, Jewish labor was used to clear the streets of snow. 
The Judenrat closed the soup kitchen in the summer of 1940, immediately after the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC) stopped sending money. Before this, the AJDC had questioned the Judenrat’s policy of not charging for meals and overspending on provisions (bought on the black market), instead of attempting to buy food at the maximum prices fixed by the German authorities in their efforts to prevent speculators; in fact, Jewish charitable organizations were still eligible to buy some food under these regulations.
In September 1940, an AJDC inspector criticized the Judenrat chairman Kaufmann for being “a flincher,” taking the easiest way out by simply refusing to reopen the soup kitchen. From then on, the Judenrat only distributed cash, which forced the poor to buy food themselves at inflated prices, whereas the Judenrat could have negotiated to pay bulk prices and also saved on fuel costs by operating a communal kitchen. The AJDC did not renew its support, as it considered its money was being spent unwisely.  
By February 1941, a branch of the welfare organization known as the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS), with its headquarters in Kraków, opened in Sokołów. It took over the provision of social aid from the Judenrat, which now included Doctor Józef Weissberg, Symche Halpern, and Awadje Breselod. Continuing the politics of the Judenrat, the JSS chose to distribute cash instead of organizing a soup kitchen. Close to half of its 1941 budget was spent supplying conscripted laborers with food and clothing. 
According to a JSS report of June 1941, a total of 400 Jews worked in labor camps outside the Kreis, most of them likely in Górna. 
In September 1941, all Jews from villages surrounding Raniżów and Sokołów, including Wola Raniżowska, Zielonka, Staniszewskie, Mazury, and Górna, were deported to Sokołów and Głogów Małopolski. A group of 250 people, mostly farmers, resettled in Sokołów, the remainder in Głogów. Those who were sent to Sokołów had been working at the open labor camp in Górna; their resettlement was to rationalize their labor there.  One Jewish survivor, who arrived in Sokołów in September 1941, described the town at that time as “a kind of a ghetto” overcrowded with refugees, but unguarded, unfenced, and with no gates. He claimed that there was no hunger and the town’s Jews could still go out and buy food.  At this time, the German Landkomissar Twardon, residing in Kolbuszowa, ordered the Kolbuszowa Judenrat to move 25 Jewish families to Sokołów and Głogów.  
A hospital was probably not established in the village until 1942. Towarzystwo Ochony Zdrowia (the Society for the Protection of Health) disinfected dirty apartments from December 1940. One source claims that there was never a serious epidemic in Sokołów and the death rate was not significantly above average. However, on December 20, 1941, the police decree of the Kreishaumptmann Heinz Ehaus announced Strzyżów, Niebylec, and Sokołów Małopolski as quarantined areas, and all traffic in and out was halted. The penalty for disobeying the order was a 1,000 złoty fine or prison time. There is no information as to when the quarantine was lifted. 
At the beginning of 1942, the Judenrat organized linen-sewing, carpentry, and agricultural courses for the youth. Although the courses began in February 1942, the Judenrat subsequently failed to establish workshops that might have offered people some form of employment and therefore perhaps security against deportation for forced labor.
The German authorities established a ghetto in Sokołów on April 27, 1942. It covered approximately 500 square meters (almost 600 square yards) and included Kupiecka and Kochanowskiego streets, as well as part of Piłsudskiego. The Poles living there had to leave their homes. Landkomissar Twardon became the commandant in charge of the Sokołów ghetto. Marcuse, a refugee, was head of the Jewish Police.  Survivor testimonies disagree on whether the Sokołów ghetto was physically enclosed or not. 
By May 1942, the ghetto had 3,000 inhabitants. The local Arbeitsamt (Labor Office) registered all newcomers aged between 14 and 60 years old. In May 1942, according to Gazeta Żydowska, approximately 800 Jews worked daily at the Luftwaffe barracks in Górno; however, it is not clear if all of them were from the Sokołów ghetto. At that time, the commander of the Górno outpost offered dinners to Jewish laborers at 0.40 złoty each. Another 100 to 120 Jews worked in Sokołów cleaning the town and repairing roads.
The Reichshof Gestapo arrived in Sokołów in early May 1942 and shot several Jews whom they believed to be communists as part of a wider Aktion throughout Distrikt Krakau.
The liquidation of the Sokołów ghetto took place in July 1942. German police officers arrived in Sokołów and shot around 30 ghetto residents, following a selection. Approximately 200 Jews were relocated to Głogów; Jewish professionals were sent to Rzeszów. The remaining Jews were given only two days to transfer to the Rzeszów ghetto. Forty Jews found hiding were murdered in four separate shootings in the forest near the village of Pogwizdów Nowy.  
Along with those expelled from other towns, Sokołów’s Jews were put into shacks outside the Rzeszów ghetto. All were most likely sent to the Bełżec extermination camp in the course of the July 1942 deportations. 
In the summer of 1943, Wehrmacht soldiers shot three Jews and executed four Poles accused of hiding them. All were shot and buried on the grounds of Sokołów’s elementary school. According to a survivor’s testimony, one Jewish man was killed in Sokołów after the end of the war, as he was accused of having been a member of the Jewish Police; an allegation that the survivor deemed to be false. 