Stary Sącz is located about 85 kilometers (53 miles) southeast of Kraków. On the eve of World War II there were about 434 Jews living in the town. 
German armed forces occupied Stary Sącz on September 5, 1939. At the end of October, the town became part of Kreis Neu-Sandez (Nowy Sącz) administered by Kreishauptmann Dr. Reinhard Busch. An office of the Border Police (Grenzpolizeikommissariat, or GPK) was established in Nowy Sącz and headed from 1940 by SS-Obersturmführer Heinrich Hamann. A unit of Polish (Blue) Police, stationed in Stary Sącz, was commanded by a Viennese official named Neumann. The Germans conscripted Jews for forced labor, mainly cleaning streets, washing latrines, and performing other degrading work. A curfew was imposed on the Jews. A Judenrat was established in the town in the fall of 1939. 
Up to the beginning of 1940, Jews were permitted to remain in their own houses, unless the house was on one of the main streets, from which all Jews were evicted, as Jews were not permitted to use them. In 1940, the Germans confiscated Jewish houses and businesses. At the end of 1940 and in the first half of 1941, the Kreishauptmann ordered that all Jews living in the smaller towns and villages must move to one of five major towns in the Kreis: Nowy Sącz, Stary Sącz, Limanowa, Mszana Dolna, or Grybów. By 1942, leaving the residential area without permission was punishable by death. 
In 1941, the Germans began to concentrate the Jews in one area on the outskirts of Stary Sącz. Jews from nearby villages and smaller towns, including Krynica, Stadło, Piwniczna, and Rytro, were brought into the town. About 1,000 Jews lived in the crowded Jewish area in the northern part of town, which became an open ghetto. It was administered by the Judenrat and policed internally by the Jewish Police, with Polish (Blue) Police acting as external guards. Due to the prohibition on leaving the ghetto and the meager food rations supplied, many Jews engaged in black market activities. The Germans also prohibited Jews from religious observance, but some Jews held clandestine religious services. 
According to a report by the Stary Sącz branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) for the period from June 26 to July 15, 1941, the Judenrat had registered 1,024 Jews, of which more than half had arrived since the start of the occupation. These included 33 merchants, 25 skilled workers, 4 farmers, 5 self employed individuals, 43 forced laborers, and 257 unemployed. Eighty-five Jews were receiving aid. Based on the community kitchen’s report for October 1941, the kitchen distributed paid and unpaid meals to 231 Jews, but 298 more people had applied for assistance. 
The Germans intensified their persecution of the Jews during 1941. On September 13, 1941, the Germans shot 20 Jewish women in the Miejska Góra Forest.  On December 13, 1941, a renewed order was issued commanding Jews to wear armbands with the Star of David. The armband had to specify the person’s last name, address, and town of residence.  At the end of December 1941, the Germans ordered that the Jews surrender any fur items and hard currency. 
On January 6, 1942, the Kreishauptmann announced that Jews could not leave their area of residence without the approval of either his office (Kreisamt) or the labor office (Arbeitsamt). Jews had to obtain an approval from the Kreishauptmann for travel by rail. In the spring or summer of 1942, the Jews from the Nowy Sącz Kreis were ordered to hand over to the Germans a contribution of 140,000 złoty, furs, large amounts of tea and coffee, and 500 pots. Somehow the Judenrat in Stary Sącz managed to scrape together their share of this harsh German demand.  
On August 14, 1942, the Germans ordered conscripted Poles of the construction service (Baudienst) to dig a large ditch in a field near the Poprad River. The Germans sent an order via the Judenrat that all Jews must assemble at the cattle market in the early hours of August 15, 1942. The Order Police and Gestapo from Nowy Sącz carried out the Aktion. A selection was made, in the course of which at least 70 people who were elderly, sick, or otherwise unfit for work were sent to one side. They were taken to the mass grave near the Poprad River and shot. The Germans also selected about 140 people from the mass of Jews for three labor detachments, issuing them special work cards stamped by the GPK in Nowy Sącz. One group consisting of 35 people was taken on trucks to perform forced labor at the Hobag-Werke in Rytro just to the south of Stary Sącz. A second group, also of 35 people, became the clean-up group (Aufräumkommando) that remained in Stary Sącz to sort the clothes and other possessions of the Jews. Another work group consisting of 70 men was marched off to the Piekło ghetto in Nowy Sącz. The remaining group of more than 300 Jews was escorted by Jewish Police to the closed ghetto on Kazimierza Street in Nowy Sącz.  The Germans deported the majority of the Jews from the two Nowy Sącz ghettos to the Bełżec extermination camp between August 24 and August 28, 1942.