Tuchów is located 88 kilometers (55 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. At the outbreak of World War II, around 500 Jews (25 percent of the population) were living in Tuchów. 
The German armed forces occupied Tuchów on September 7, 1939. On September 11, Wehrmacht soldiers shot 12 Jews from Tuchów in the Karwodrza Forest. In November 1939, the Germans burned down the synagogue and destroyed the Jewish cemetery, using Jewish tombstones (matzevot) to pave roads. As soon as the Germans entered the town, they began maltreating the Jews by cutting the beards of Orthodox Jews, looting Jewish businesses, and destroying homes. In December 1939, all Jewish men aged 13 and older were ordered to appear at the local school. The Germans selected 15 men and murdered them in the nearby village of Tarnowiec. The Jewish community paid a bribe to the Germans, so that the corpses could be brought back to town for a religious Jewish burial. A Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by Emil Wachs was appointed by the Germans to keep records of the Jewish population and to enlist Jews for forced labor. 
In 1941, the Germans resettled Jews into Tuchów from neighboring towns and villages, including Ryglice and Gromniki. According to records of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization in Tarnów, on September 30, 1941, there were 536 Jews in Tuchów. The Judenrat and the local branch of the JSS used their scarce resources to assist the refugees as much as possible. In January 1942, the community kitchen distributed 150 meals daily, but it lacked sufficient food to supply all those in need. On March 4, 1942, the JSS opened a public kitchen in Tuchów for about 50 Jewish children. 
Since the Nazis prohibited religious observance, the Jews of Tuchów worshipped secretly, and the home of the Weiss family became a prayer house. In May 1942, the Germans discovered this secret house of worship and murdered six elderly Jews who were praying. 
In 1942, the Germans established a ghetto in Tuchów, which was administered by Karl Oppermann and Hermann Blache, of the Security Police in Tarnów, and by a man named Prussok, who was sent to the Tarnów region from the Schutzpolizei in Breslau (Wrocław). A Jewish Police unit was set up in the ghetto, which was located in the southern part of town, and enclosed with barbed wire. On its establishment, about 2,500 Jews were confined in a ghetto consisting of only 17 houses. (During the entire existence of the ghetto, some 3,000 Jews passed through it.) The Jews worked on local farms, as well as in workshops. The Jews in the Tuchów ghetto did not receive food from the German authorities, but the JSS and the Judenrat distributed food purchased with their scarce resources. There were random shootings of Jews inside, as well as outside the ghetto, and the bodies were buried at the Jewish cemetery. 
In mid-June 1942, the German Schutzpolizei officer Prussok publicly executed six Jews in the town square. On June 23, 1942, Karl Oppermann shot seven Jews, including the chairman of the Judenrat. On orders issued by the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the towns of Kreis Tarnow, except from the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move into ghettos established in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno by July 23, 1942. In September 1942, units of German and Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the Tuchów ghetto. The Jews were commanded to assemble in the town square. After a selection, the Jews were taken to the train station, loaded into cattle trains, and were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Only 43 Jews were spared deportation. They formed the Aufräumkommando, which was ordered by the Germans to clear the ghetto and sort Jewish belongings. The work was finished at the beginning of December 1942. The German Gestapo officer from Tarnów, Oppermann, ordered that the Jews be locked in a building until their resettlement to Tarnów. The next day, Oppermann inspected the building in which the Jews were being held and shot a Jewish man, Grunewald. In December 1942, Oppermann shot 26 Jews at Ogrodowa Street in Tuchów. Once the remnant of Jews from the Tuchów ghetto had been brought to the Tarnów ghetto, Oppermann ordered all of them to be shot. A few managed to escape. The survivors related their stories at the trial of Karl Oppermann in Germany, where he was sentenced to life imprisonment. 