olbrom is located 38 kilometers (24 miles) north-northwest of Kraków. In 1921, the Jewish population of the town was 4,276 (59 percent of the total), rising by 1931 to 5,450 Jews. 
When the German invasion began on September 1, 1939, many young men from Wolbrom, Jews and non-Jews, were mobilized into the Polish armed forces. Some were killed in action or captured and taken to Germany, but soon afterward the POWs were sent home. When the German army entered the town, it had been emptied of young Jewish men. Dozens of Jews were immediately shot. The Germans drove the Jews out of town in the direction of Zawiercie, and a number died of exhaustion on this forced march. After two weeks they were allowed to return. 
On a daily basis the Germans abused and humiliated prominent members of the community. They forced the rabbi, doctors, nurses, and pharmacists to sweep the streets. Other Jews were put to work repairing the rail line to Olkusz and Chrzanów. A Jewish council (Judenrat), headed by Moshe Aharon Wolochinsky, was established. A Jewish police force was also recruited. Refugees from Upper Silesia, Kraków, and Łódź, seeking a more secure place, arrived in Wolbrom. Former residents who had left town before 1939 came home. Some who were in the Soviet occupied area of prewar Poland crossed the cease-fire line to rejoin their families. 
The Judenrat was responsible for extracting the money and goods demanded by the German authorities, organizing forced labor, monitoring the 7:00 P.M. until dawn curfew, and enforcing the order for Jews to wear a white armband with a blue Star of David on their sleeves. Jews were required to stay in their own dwellings, refrain from travel to other towns (except with a permit obtainable for a suitable bribe), shave their beards, and not eat white bread. Meat, butter, and eggs, most of which the Germans took from local farmers, were also forbidden to the Jews. Clothing and leather goods were confiscated from Jewish shops, as well as gold and silver, and put into military storehouses. The displacement of people from areas destined for annexation to Germany brought additional refugees to Wolbrom, which was near the new border. When the Jews of Kraków were driven out of the city and their apartments given to SS and Gestapo officers, hundreds more Jews arrived in Wolbrom. The local community struggled to absorb them, mostly in their own homes, with some put up in communal buildings. The Judenrat established a public kitchen, which by October 1940 was feeding up to 200 Jews, so that no one went hungry, despite the deplorable conditions. 
According to the records of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) branch in Wolbrom, in May 1941, just prior to the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the German authorities established an open ghetto, which consisted of 177 houses located in the vicinity of the synagogue.  From the summer of 1941, conditions for the Jews in Wolbrom worsened considerably. By early 1942, a much more brutal Gendarmerie officer, Leutnant Baumgarten, had taken over from Leutnant Müller in command of the 15-man Gendarmerie post on the outskirts of town. Under this new leadership, the Gendarmerie significantly increased the tempo of random killings, abuse, coercion, and demands for money, gold rings, silver synagogue ornaments, and fur coats.  The few goods and valuables that people had in their homes were confiscated. The price of food shot up, resulting in increased shortages and hunger, and the overcrowded conditions exacerbated the deteriorating situation. On April 1, 1942, 4,940 Jews were registered as living in the Wolbrom ghetto, or more than 20 per house. 
In July 1942, the Germans set up a clothing factory in the Bet Midrash HaGadol (community study center) and all tailors were ordered to report with their sewing machines. In August the German authorities demanded 20 kilograms (44.1 pounds) of gold, which the Judenrat managed to collect in the naive hope that this would appease the occupiers. 
The SD office in Kraków organized the first Aktion in Wolbrom in early September 1942. Word spread that on Thursday, September 3, the rabbi and synagogue leaders had hidden the Torah scrolls in a crate and buried it in the old Jewish cemetery – a sure sign that disaster loomed. On Friday the SS notified the Judenrat that everyone was required to report to the market square by 8:00 A.M. on Saturday morning, including the old and the weak. They were to bring up to 10 kilograms (22 pounds) of food and clothing, and leave the doors of their houses unlocked. Anyone attempting to flee or hide would be shot on the spot. The Jews made ready for the fateful day; some hid valuables in their homes. A number of them committed suicide by overdosing on pain-relieving medicine. On Saturday, September 5, the SS and Ukrainian auxiliaries, assisted by the German Gendarmerie and units of the Polish (Blue) Police surrounded the Jewish quarter. As people gathered in the square they saw wagonloads of conscripted Polish youth of the Baudienst carrying shovels and axes. Probably in excess of 6,000 people, including deportees and refugees, were assembled in the square. The initial step was to load about 300 elderly and weak people onto carts (as if to spare them the march to the train station) and take them to the Olkusk Forest opposite the Jewish cemetery, where they were stripped, shot, and thrown into open pits. The rest of those assembled were herded into a marshy area opposite the station. 
Jews from two neighboring towns (which had no train station) were brought to Wolbrom. Around 12:00 A.M., about 1,000 arrived from Żarnowiec. At 4:00 P.M., more than 1,000 from Pilica were brought in, swelling the assembly to more than 7,000. Toward evening the Germans separated out about 2,500 men, aged 18 to 50 and fit for work, and designated them for forced labor. The rest were sent east in cattle wagons to the Bełżec extermination camp. 
The workers, joined by Jews who had been hiding, were held in the community study center. For example, 23-year-old Willie Sterner gave himself up after hiding for three weeks, once he learned the fate of the rest of his family. Over the next few weeks, representatives of German factories came to claim the workers, in groups of several hundred, for forced labor, sending many of them to the Plaszów camp. Their number dwindled to about 150, who were put to work burying the dead and gathering abandoned household goods for shipment to Germany. 
From mid-September 1942 until the liberation of the town at the end of 1944, nearly 400 Jews, who were found or denounced while in hiding, were shot at the Jewish cemetery. At the beginning of November 1942 the final contingent of Jews was sent to Bełżec from Wolbrom. 