Zakliczyn is located about 72 kilometers (45 miles) east-southeast of Kraków. On the outbreak of World War II, there were around 600 Jews (40 percent of the total population) living in Zakliczyn. 
The German army entered Zakliczyn on September 5, 1939. The Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Zakliczyn chaired by Jakub Appel. Other Judenrat members included Mendel Ebenholz, Michał Frant, Izak Kirschenbaum, Roman Finder, and a woman – with the surname Weinstock. 
In 1940, around 220 Jewish refugees from Kraków (50 people), Krynica, and from the countryside arrived in Zakliczyn. The situation of the Jews living in the town was terrible: there was not enough food, medicine, or housing.  In the first months of 1941, around 38 Jews from Zakliczyn were sent to the Pustków labor camp.  Jews also performed forced labor on road construction in the area. In June 1941, the Zakliczyn branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established, with Pinkas Kupfer as chair and Emil Lerner as his deputy.  In October 1941 an epidemic of typhus broke out among the Jewish population of Zakliczyn: about 6 Jews contracted the disease.  In December 1941 a kitchen for around 50 children was opened in Zakliczyn. Apart from receiving meals, the children celebrated Jewish holidays such as Hanukkah.  The JSS was forced to close the community and children’s kitchens in April 1942, due to lack of food. The Jewish inhabitants suffered from hunger and diseases related to malnutrition. 
On July 10, 1942, the Germans established a ghetto in Zakliczyn, which was sealed on July 23, 1942 at 9:00 A.M. The Jewish community had to pay the Germans a “contribution” of 50,000 złoty, and surrender furniture, and other valuable items.  According to an order issued by the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów on July 15, 1942, Jews from the towns of Kreis Tarnow, except from the city of Tarnów itself, were required to move to concentration points in Dąbrowa Tarnowska, Brzesko, Tuchów, Zakliczyn, and Żabno by July 23, 1942.  The Zakliczyn ghetto was an enclosed ghetto surrounded by barbed wire. There was only one gate located on the side that bordered the town square. The ghetto was located between the left side of Mickiewicza Street and Piłsudskiego Street, covering an area of around 500 square meters (599 square yards). The ghetto was under the authority of the Kreishauptmann in Tarnów Dr. Kipke, his deputy Dr. Pyrnus, and SS-Sturmscharführer Wilhelm Rommelman of the Security Police in Tarnów.  In the ghetto there were workshops for tailors and cobblers. A Jewish Police unit was established under the direction of Chaim Ebenholz. Its members included: Hersz Frant, Kantorowicz, Stenek Schreiber, Handel, Spitzer, Mendel Finder, Schneiderman, Leon Dener, Dow Mikołajewicz, Hausman, Józef Schlanger, and Irom. 
More than 2,000 Jews from Zakliczyn and its vicinity were concentrated in the ghetto. Jews from Wojnicz (356), Czchów (290), Ciężkowice (286), Iwkowa (183), Uszwia (147), Pleśna (58), Gromnik (57), Radłów (33), Szczurowa (14), Gumniska (11), and Wietrzychowice (4), in total, 1,439 additional people, were forced into the ghetto. As communication with people outside the ghetto was cut off almost completely, and the Jews had virtually no financial resources left, there was starvation among the ghetto’s inhabitants. Some of the Jewish refugees who arrived in Zakliczyn had already been resettled several times and were unable to bring with them much in the way of personal belongings. They were housed in barns and attics with no sleeping mattresses, since the Jewish quarter consisted of only about 160 rooms and was unable to accommodate all of the new arrivals. Around 20 people had to share one room. Until the end of summer people even slept outside. Before the influx of resettled Jews, about 50 Jews from Zakliczyn were receiving meals at the community kitchen. Thereafter the community kitchen had to feed 825 people.  There was a Jewish medical unit in the ghetto directed by Dr. Helena Schajer-Ehrlichowa and Dr. Józef Bester. 
In mid-September 1942, German police forces liquidated the ghetto in Zakliczyn. The Jews were deported by rail from the Gromnik station to the Bełżec extermination camp. About 72 adult Jews and 1 child, mainly the members of the Jewish Police and the Judenrat and their families, were spared deportation. The Jews, planning on escaping to the forest, began to organize weapons with the aid of some Poles, but they were denounced to the Gestapo. On December 12, 1942, SS-Unterscharführer Rommelmann shot about 50 Jews in Zakliczyn, who were buried in a mass grave near the synagogue. The Germans ordered the synagogue to be dismantled afterwards. Around 20 Jews still remained to clean up the area of the ghetto. Five Jews had to bury the dead and 4 Jewish girls were taken to the Tarnów ghetto. The remaining 16 Jews were taken to Brzesko cemetery to be shot. Only one Jew was able to escape from this last remnant. 
Among the few survivors from the Zakliczyn ghetto were Regina (Rivka) Riegelhaupt and her two daughters Lea and Judit, who were smuggled out of the ghetto dressed as Polish peasants by a Polish acquaintance, Andrzej Piechniczek, shortly before the ghetto’s liquidation. They survived by hiding with a number of poor peasants until the liberation, but nearly starved. Others were not so lucky. German Police from Zakliczyn shot Maria Pierzynski on January 20, 1944 for sheltering two Jews, Benjamin and Roman Sukman.